https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06415.x
Back to the future: the new ICE age
Summary The analysis of bacterial genomes has revealed an extraordinary array of conjugal elements (integrative and conjugative element or ICE) that reside in bacterial chromosomes. These elements contribute to the pan-genomes of individual species and confer a wide variety of properties on their bacterial hosts. ICEBs1 is a conjugal element found in Bacillus subtilis that has a remarkable regulatory mechanism that apparently favours conjugation when there are suitable recipient bacteria at high density or when the bacterial host is facing DNA-damaging stresses. In the current issue, Bose et al. dissect the mechanism of induction of transfer of this element, and reveal a new, apparently widespread repressor anti-repressor system and a new mechanism of repressor destruction by proteolysis.
Twenty-five years ago, at a time when it was firmly established that transmissible antibiotic resistance could result from conjugal transfer of plasmids carrying resistance genes from one bacterium to another, the first reports appeared of transfer of chromosomally encoded resistance genes from one bacterial strain to another without the involvement of a plasmid (Clewell, 1981). These reports centred on the Gram-positive cocci, and led to the discovery of genetic elements termed conjugative transposons (Churchward, 2002). These elements, exemplified by Clewell's original, Tn916, and its twin, Tn1545, have a modular structure and contain blocks of genes dedicated to integration into and excision from the chromosome, as well as conjugal transfer between a remarkably broad range of bacterial species (Scott and Churchward, 1995). Similar elements were soon found in other bacteria, notably Bacteroides sp., and further analysis revealed the existence of smaller elements that can be mobilized by the presence of larger conjugative transposons residing in the same host cell (Salyers et al., 1995a). Although it was clear that these elements were important determinants of antibiotic resistance in bacterial populations, it took the advent of genome sequencing to reveal just how diverse and widely distributed these conjugal elements are. In fact, this realization led to the proposal that they be renamed integrative and conjugative elements, or ICE (Burrus et al., 2002a). These elements are now known to be important constituents of the pan-genome of many bacterial species, both Gram-positive and Gram-negative (Burrus et al., 2002b; 2006).
Tn916 is the smallest and least complex of the conjugative elements, and is found in several different Gram-positive cocci. An almost identical element, Tn5397, is found in Clostridium difficile: the integration and excision genes of Tn916 have been replaced by a serine recombinase (Mullaney et al., 1990). The next closest relative of Tn916 (similar gene organization with approximately 30% sequence identity between those genes in common) is found in Bacillus subtilis. Until recently, this element, ICEBs1, received little attention. Then in 2005, Alan Grossman's group at Massachusetts Institute of Technology published an article describing the first characterization of the element (Auchtung et al., 2005). They showed that its transfer is regulated by a Rap/Phr system, encoded by the element, in such a way as to favour transfer when surrounded by high densities of cells not carrying the element and, independently, by the host cell SOS response. As well as characterizing the integration/excision system (Lee et al., 2007) and the origin of transfer and relaxase of the element (Lee and Grossman, 2007), they identified the element-encoded repressor that regulates expression of the genes required for excision and transfer (Auchtung et al., 2007). They showed that this repressor, ImmR, serves as an immunity repressor, preventing acquisition of additional copies of ICEBs1.
In their most recent paper, published in this issue, the Grossman laboratory provides another intriguing twist in the ICEBs1 story. They show that inactivation of ImmR through either RapI/PhrI signalling or DNA damage requires an element-encoded anti-repressor named ImmA. ImmR is similar in structure to many phage repressors that undergo proteolysis following exposure to activated RecA protein, but lacks the requisite sequence determinants for RecA-mediated auto-proteolysis. ImmA is a metalloprotease that cleaves ImmR. Although RecA is required for SOS induction of ICEBs1 transfer, it is not required for RapI/PhrI-mediated induction. Thus, induction of ICEBs1 transfer requires the destruction of ImmR, but rather than being mediated by RecA, this destruction is initiated by cleavage of ImmR by ImmA. The role of RecA in SOS induction of ICEBs1 transfer remains to be determined. It turns out that this ImmA-mediated mechanism of ImmR inactivation is not peculiar to ICEBs1. The ImmR/ImmA genes are widely distributed among more than 27 different species of bacteria.
ICEBs1 is, of course, not the only conjugal element whose regulation has been studied. Transfer of the CTnDOT that confers tetracycline resistance is induced by the presence of tetracycline (Salyers et al., 1995b). The transfer genes of Tn916 and Tn1545 are activated by a particularly elegant mechanism that places a transcriptional promoter upstream of the genes upon excision and circularization of the element (Celli and Trieu-Cuot, 1998). There is evidence of complex regulatory interactions occurring between the recombination and conjugation systems of several of these elements (Churchward, 2002). However, the fact that a genetic element such as ICEBs1 can lurk undetected for so long in the genome of one of the best studied microorganisms and then be found to use such novel regulatory mechanisms is extremely exciting.
So what of the future? That the role of RecA in ICEBs1 induction remains to be elucidated means that there will be further surprises as investigation of this element continues. However, I think that we can expect a broader impact of these studies. Tn916 was rapidly pressed into service as a tool for the genetic engineering of bacteria such as Streptococcus pyogenes that lack natural transformation or conjugation systems (Caparon and Scott, 1991). However, while very high frequencies of excision could be achieved (Marra and Scott, 1999), it never proved possible to accomplish levels of conjugal transfer similar to those found with F and the derivatives of the broad host range R6K and RP4 plasmids so commonly used as tools for the analysis of Gram-negative bacteria. The dissection of the ICEBs1 system promises to accomplish this. I can see two potentially far-reaching consequences. The first is in providing tools to simplify the genetic analysis of Gram-positive bacteria. The second is in the study of the process of conjugation. The conjugation genes of ICEBs1 and its relatives show similarities to those of the much better understood Gram-negative bacterial conjugation systems, but the ICEBs1 system must be simpler – the bacteria that interact during conjugation only have one membrane, not two. Studies of ICEBs1 conjugation will add to ongoing efforts to elucidate the mechanisms of conjugal DNA transfer in Gram-positive bacteria. However, if we could emulate the time travellers Marty McFly and Dr. Emmet L. Brown and get the DeLorean time machine up to its critical speed of 88, I think that we would arrive in the future and find that the most important outcome of studying ICEBs1 will have been a much better understanding of the behaviour of conjugative elements in response to changes in the environment of the host.