https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.2011.00274.x
Multilevel populations and the evolution of antibiotic resistance through horizontal gene transfer
Abstract Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) can create diversity in the genetic repertoire of a lineage. Successful gene transfer likely occurs more frequently between more closely related organisms, leading to the formation of higher-level exchange groups that in some respects are comparable to single-species populations. Genes that appear fixed in a single species can be replaced through distant homologs or iso-functional analogs acquired through HGT. These genes may originate from other species or they may be acquired by an individual strain from the species pan-genome. Because of their similarity to alleles in a population, we label these gene variants that are exchanged between related species as homeoalleles. In a case study, we show that biased gene transfer plays an important role in the evolution of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS). Many microorganisms make use of these genes against naturally occurring antibiotics. We suggest that the resistance against naturally occurring antibiotics is the likely driving force behind the frequent switching between divergent aaRS types and the reason for the maintenance of these homeoalleles in higher-level exchange groups.
Introduction Horizontal gene transfer (HGT), the exchange of genetic information between two organisms that do not share an ancestor–descendant relationship, is a mechanism that contributes significantly to the rapid creation of biological novelty that otherwise might have taken millions of years to occur (Jain et al., 2003; Boto et al., 2010). As opposed to vertical inheritance (parent-to-offspring transmission), gene transfer respects no taxonomic boundaries, with genes being swapped within the genus level (Shoemaker et al., 2001) and even between distantly related lineages belonging to different domains (Hilario & Gogarten, 1993; Gogarten et al., 1995; Doolittle et al., 1999; Gogarten et al., 2002). Some highways of gene transfer between evolutionary divergent lineages have been identified (Beiko et al., 2005), as in the case of hyperthermophilic Bacteria and Archaea (Aravind et al., 1998; Nelson et al., 1999; Boussau et al., 2008; Zhaxybayeva et al., 2009), most likely as a consequence of their common ecological niches. The amount of the genetic material that can be horizontally transferred may range from gene fragments (Wang & Zhang, 2000; Chan et al., 2009) to genes (Emiliani et al., 2009), operons (Olendzenski et al., 2000), superoperons that encode complex biochemical pathways (Igarashi et al., 2001), and even whole chromosomes (Akagi et al., 2009). Many genes, including some that were initially thought to be resilient to transfer (Jain et al., 1999), are not found where they are expected to be, i.e. for a particular gene, two organisms may show a close relationship even though the organisms that harbor them are separated by a sizeable evolutionary distance in the tree/net of life. This fascinating phenomenon clearly reflects the dynamic nature of the microbial world.
The ability of many microorganisms to acquire genetic material is of primary concern in the medical field. The spread of antibiotic resistance genes in bacterial populations through HGT (Gootz, 2010) and the rapid emergence, mutation, and diversification of disease-causing organisms (Hanage et al., 2009) can significantly exacerbate the problem of bacterial infections that are impervious to many commercially available drugs. Given these challenges, how do we accurately represent the evolutionary history of a lineage? Previous studies made use of a consensus signal or a central tendency (Zhaxybayeva et al., 2004; Puigbo et al., 2009) from a number of gene trees, or simply ignoring conflicting genes from analysis (Lerat et al., 2003; Ciccarelli et al., 2006). In all these cases, the resulting tree would explicitly represent the evolution of only a subset of genes, and not of the species or lineage as a genomic whole. The dilemma of tracing organismal lineages and of classifying organisms in a natural system based on shared ancestry (Hennig, 1966) becomes even worse when an organism has acquired a large number of genes from different origins, possibly even the majority of its total genomic content (Boussau et al., 2008; Zhaxybayeva et al., 2009). Not only is it a challenge, both philosophically and taxonomically, to accurately identify the organism, but the treatment of diseases caused by such organisms can also be problematic. A classic example is the three strains of Escherichia coli that share only about 40% of their genes with each other (Welch et al., 2002). Species boundaries for prokaryotes then become ‘fuzzy’ (Hanage et al., 2005) as more genes are exchanged across taxonomic boundaries.
Tracing genes through the net of life is further complicated by the observation that some ancient gene transfers involve extinct or unknown lineages as donors. An extreme example of this is pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase (PylRS), which has a deep phylogenetic position among class II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) consistent with a divergence long before most other orthologous genes coalesce to their most recent common ancestor, as is the case for other aaRS paralogs. However, the scattered phylogenetic distribution of PylRS among a handful of bacterial and archaeal species suggests independent acquisition via horizontal transfer. This apparent paradox can be resolved by the existence of an unidentified deeply diverged lineage in which the Pyl system originally evolved; in fact, this parent lineage may be long extinct, with the Pyl system continuing as a ‘genetic life raft’ through sequential horizontal transfer events from this early time (Fournier et al., 2009).
The metabolic capabilities of a microbial lineage are in a constant flux as genes move in and out of the genome. The pan-genome of a species includes many genes that most of the time exist in phages and plasmids and that only sometimes are integrated into the genome; consequently, the pan-genome of a species is often many times larger than the genome of a single cell (Gogarten & Townsend, 2005; Medini et al., 2005; Lapierre & Gogarten, 2009). The species pan-genome can then act as a genetic repository containing DNA that may be laterally acquired by an individual genome, in addition to genes from more distantly related sources.
In this review, we discuss the role of HGT in the expansion of gene diversity and in the formation of higher-level taxonomic units. Exchange groups are created through different propensities of organisms toward their transfer partners. We also describe how biased gene transfer plays a role in the development of antibiotic resistance in bacterial populations, with a focus on aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, a family of enzymes that are being recognized as frequent antibiotic targets.
HGT as a source of genetic diversity In addition to mutations and gene duplications, the horizontal acquisition of genetic material can provide metabolic and physiological innovation to the recipient organism, allowing the latter to exploit previously untapped functional capabilities. For example, two genes involved in acetoclastic methanogenesis in the archaeal Methanosarcinaceae were derived from cellulolytic bacteria of the class Clostridia (Fournier & Gogarten, 2008). A recent study reported that the genes involved in the degradation of an algal polysaccharide were transferred from marine bacteria to the gut bacterium Bacteroides isolated from Japanese individuals via seaweed consumption (Hehemann et al., 2010). Similar events can also be observed in eukaryotes. Horizontal transfer of carotenoid biosynthesis genes from fungi to the ancestor of aphids has allowed these insects to manufacture their own carotenoids, the only animals that can do so (Moran & Jarvik, 2010). A single transfer of cellulose synthase genes took place from a prokaryote to the chordate ancestor of the tunicates, conferring cellulose biosynthesis to only this group of metazoans (Sagane et al., 2010).
A number of HGT events have conferred a selective advantage to the recipient organism, providing an opportunity to adapt to new ecological conditions (Marri et al., 2007). The massive gene exchange observed in Shewanella baltica isolates includes many genes involved in anaerobic metabolism, thus allowing them to adapt successfully to the deeper, anoxic waters of the Baltic Sea (Caro-Quintero et al., 2010). Adaptation of Prochlorococcus to phosphate limitation was made possible through the horizontal transfer of phosphate acquisition genes (Martiny et al., 2009). Bacterial adaptation to contaminated environments may be facilitated by HGT. The acquisition of PIB-type ATPases, enzymes that regulate the transport of heavy metals, by Arthrobacter sp. allowed them to survive in radionuclide- and metal-contaminated soils (Martinez et al., 2006). A high diversity of mercuric reductase genes from various soil bacterial species likely has been spread horizontally in response to metal contamination (Oregaard & Sorensen, 2007). Although HGT contribute to bacterial adaptation by bringing in novel genes into the genome, the majority of transfers may be nearly neutral to the recipient (Gogarten & Townsend, 2005), impacting the gene content of many organisms without conferring any immediate benefits to the recipient organism.
Biased gene transfer and taxonomic relationships HGT appears to be the norm, and not the exception, in the microbial world. Sharing of genetic material between close relatives appears to be more prevalent than random, indiscriminate transfers between distantly related lineages. Bias in successful gene transfer has long been postulated, and the reasons for this expected bias were investigated (Olendzenski et al., 2001; Gogarten et al., 2002; Hendrickson & Lawrence, 2006). Several analyses inferred frequent transfers between closely related organisms (e.g. Beiko et al., 2005; Zhaxybayeva et al., 2006); however, some of these transfers might reflect uncertainty in the reference phylogeny. Most approaches to detect transferred genes (Zhaxybayeva, 2009) are biased against detecting transfers between close relatives: approaches based on sequence composition fail because the composition is too similar between the donor and the recipient; phylogenetic approaches fail because the phylogenetic conflict created through the transfer is either not detectable, in case of transfer between sister groups, or does not lead to significantly supported conflict (Poptsova, 2009). A recent study of the Legionella pneumophila pan-genome (Coscolla et al., 2011) found a strong negative correlation between phylogenetic distance and HGT frequency. This correlation persisted even when genes donated from other Gammaproteobacteria were excluded from the analysis (Coscolla et al., 2011), removing phylogenetic uncertainty as a possible cause for this finding. In a study using gene absence/presence analysis of isofunctional divergent enzymes, so-called homeoalleles (see the discussion below), we confirmed a transfer bias in favor of related organisms (Andam et al., 2010b). In this case, HGT was revealed through the distribution of the different types on the reference phylogeny, not through the difficult to ascertain phylogenetic conflict within each type.
As a result of bias in transfer partners, organisms become even more similar to each other as they continue to share genes. Therefore, it becomes difficult to determine whether the observed similarity of any two organisms, and hence their relatedness, is a consequence of shared ancestry or the frequency of genetic exchange (Olendzenski et al., 2001; Gogarten et al., 2002; Andam et al., 2010a, b). In a previous study (Andam et al., 2010b), we have shown through simulation of unbiased and biased HGT that random transfers destroy the phylogenetic signal originally present in the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (TyrRS) homeoalleles, as shown by a decreasing congruence between TyrRS and 16S rRNA gene phylogenies. On the other hand, biased gene transfers can maintain or recreate TyrRS phylogenetic patterns similar to the 16S rRNA gene phylogenies (Andam et al., 2010b). Puigbo et al. (2010) performed simulations of gene transfer and vertical inheritance that confirmed the possibility of biased gene transfer creating patterns similar to vertical inheritance, although, given their exploration of parameter space, they exclude the possibility that the deep split between Archaea and Bacteria could solely be due to biased gene transfer without any contribution due to vertical inheritance. Preferential modes of gene sharing may therefore actually contribute to the observed signal of relatedness between microorganisms. This concept has significant implications in taxonomical studies and the classification of microorganisms (Olendzenski et al., 2002). If taxonomy is based on identifying natural relationships, then other evolutionary processes, including HGT, gene loss, introgression, lineage sorting, and hybridization, must be taken into consideration as well (Bapteste et al., 2009). In some populations of microorganisms, these processes may even be the dominant evolutionary factors.
The propensity to transfer genes with close relatives is likely a function of their similar genetic features, such as the replication, transcription and translation machineries, and the signals used in genome architecture (Olendzenski et al., 2001; Hendrickson & Lawrence, 2006; Andam et al., 2010a), which ensures the success of the transfer and the expression of the novel gene without being detrimental to the recipient's system. As a consequence of this bias, a gradient in the frequency of transfers is created, i.e., crossing of genes across higher-level taxonomic boundaries (domain, phylum) is less likely to occur than HGT at lower levels (species, genus, family) (Gogarten et al., 2002; Andam et al., 2010a). This gradient therefore can lead to the formation or the reinforcement of different taxonomic categories in microorganisms. As long as the members of a group continue to swap genes with each other, the group as a whole will continue to persist in a stable, recognizable form over time (Andam et al., 2010a). The rate of successful transfers therefore relates to the overall genetic similarity, which then generates the cohesion of a group. In this scenario, members of the Alphaproteobacteria, for example, would swap genes with each other more often than they do with members of the Actinobacteria, making the Alphaproteobacteria more homogenous and cohesive. This then contributes to defining the boundaries of the Alphaproteobacteria as a class, whether or not it originally emerged via shared ancestry and vertical descent.
The existence of a transfer barrier, for example the presence of restriction nucleases that degrade foreign genes (Thomas & Nielsen, 2005) or differences in ecological niches, can limit the exchange of genetic material between organisms. However, if they continue to acquire genes from distantly related organisms, they will eventually become less similar to their close species kin, even if they share a recent common ancestor, and will resemble their transfer partners in spite of evolutionary distance. Intriguing examples for highways of gene sharing (Beiko et al., 2005) caused by overlapping ecological niches include the thermophilic groups Thermotogales and Aquificae (Boussau et al., 2008; Zhaxybayeva et al., 2009). Ribosomal phylogenies position these groups at the base of the bacterial domain, which might suggest that they evolved earlier than the rest of the Bacteria (Woese et al., 1987). However, the plurality of their genes group the Thermotogales among the Clostridia, and the Aquificae with the Epsilonproteobacteria (Gophna et al., 2005; Boussau et al., 2008; Zhaxybayeva et al., 2009). It is difficult then to decide which of the components in the genomes of the extreme thermophilic bacteria reflect organismal history. One reasonable scenario is that the rRNA and ribosomal proteins are closely tied to the organismal history, while about 5–20% (the values differ due to taxon sampling) of genes have archaeal origins (Nelson et al., 1999; Boussau et al., 2008; Zhaxybayeva et al., 2009), and the remaining majority of genes are from Clostridia or Epsilonproteobacteria, respectively.
Phylogenies based on ribosomal components (rRNA or ribosomal proteins) are usually used as a substitute for organismal or species trees founded on vertical inheritance, and they are considered to be resilient to horizontal transfer (Jain et al., 1999; Sorek et al., 2007). However, many studies have shown that these genes can also be transferred across taxonomic boundaries. Segmental transfer of rRNA genes has been reported to occur in both prokaryotes (Wang et al., 1997; Schouls et al., 2003) and eukaryotes (Ueno et al., 2007). Both intra- and intergenomic heterogeneity in 16S rRNA gene (Ueda et al., 1999; Boucher et al., 2004; Morandi et al., 2005; Viezens & Arvand, 2008) and in ribosomal proteins (Brochier et al., 2000; Inagaki et al., 2006; Chen et al., 2009) have been identified, suggesting that the transfer of rRNA genes and operons does occur, but most often between related species. This poses a challenge (Andam et al., 2010a) because ribosomal genes and proteins themselves are subjected to biased gene exchange; however, the transfer of ribosomal components between divergent organisms appears to be rare (Jain et al., 1999; Sorek et al., 2007), and transfer biased towards similar organisms, followed by homologous recombination would tend to reinforce the relationships created through shared ancestry (Andam et al., 2010a). For these reasons, a ribosomal phylogeny, while possibly integrating over reticulations within closely related microbial groups [e.g. within genera, families, and, in some cases, archaeal orders (G. P. Fournier, unpublished data)], will remain robust across larger phylogenetic distances, and be informative for determining the ribosomal relationships between these groups. That being said, a single bifurcating genealogy reflecting the history of a single cellular component certainly falls short of capturing the full evolutionary histories of genomes and organisms. The history of the ribosome, even if perfectly reconstructed, is no more but also no less than the history of the ribosome. The recognition and appreciation of different evolutionary mechanisms, including biased gene transfer, that underlie the observed prokaryotic relationships and that shaped genome content are necessary for a complete understanding of the evolutionary process (Bapteste et al., 2009). The ribosomal tree as reconstructed from ribosomal proteins and RNA makes an appropriate starting point to reconstruct the net-like history of life (Gogarten et al., 1995; Dagan et al., 2008; Swithers et al., 2009), but it should not be mistaken for a depiction of the evolutionary history of organisms.
Homeoalleles and higher-level population genetics A population is a group of often interbreeding individuals belonging to the same species that possess a common gene pool created through shared ancestry and gene transfer. Lineages of that population access this gene pool as they evolve through time. Higher taxonomic groups of prokaryotes also exhibit a behavior similar to single-species populations (Andam et al., 2010a). Members of a population exchange genes through the recombination of homologous chromosomal fragments, and a gene for a particular phenotype can be disseminated in the population through this process. Moreover, alleles (variant forms of a gene) may be distributed among the members at varying frequencies and an individual may possess either or both copies. The presence or absence of a specific allele in an individual depends on the genetic makeup of its recombining parents. In the same way, higher-level taxonomic units can possess allele-like copies of gene, called homeoalleles (Andam et al., 2010a, b), divergent enzymes that perform identical functions that are swapped within an exchange group, in the same way that alleles display different phenotypic characteristics. The genes that encode for divergent homeoalleles may arise through ancient duplication events before the group came into existence (Andam et al., 2010a, b). Homeoalleles can be exchanged between different lower-level groups (species, genus, family) within a higher-level taxonomic group through HGT (Fig. 1). Individual lineages can acquire different versions of a homeoallele, and it can also be lost from a lineage and be replaced by another version. Moreover, a lineage may possess both versions of homeoalleles (Andam et al., 2010a, b), similar to heterozygous individuals in a single-species population. Although a genome usually carries only one form of the homeoallele, both copies persist at the phylum level as a consequence of gene transfer. The outcome of this gene exchange is that higher-order taxonomic units function as exchange groups, resembling individuals in a population that recombine with each other (Gogarten et al., 2002; Andam et al., 2010a, b).
Sanchez-Perez et al. (2008) introduced the term ecoparalog to denote paralogs that differ little in sequence and perform identical functions, but under different ecological conditions. The divergent rRNA encoding operons in Haloarcula marismortui that facilitate the organism's adaptation to different temperatures (Lopez-Lopez et al., 2007) are an example for an ecoparalog. The homeoallele and ecoparalog concepts are overlapping, but distinct: ecoparalogs assume an ecological specification, whereas homeoalleles may or may not have an ecological difference. While homeoalleles may be divergent homologs, proven homology is not a crucial part of the definition. Homeoalleles have the same function and can substitute for each other either neutrally or under changing selection through exchange across the species boundary. Some nonhomologous genes (Koonin et al., 1996; Koonin, 2003) or isofunctional enzymes (Omelchenko et al., 2010), whose homology cannot be established, may turn out to be homeoalleles; however, further investigation of their phylogeny and phylogenetic distribution is necessary to test this hypothesis. In contrast to paralogs, homeoalleles encoding the same function usually do not co-occur in the same genome; rather, homeoalleles coexist in higher taxonomic-level exchange groups. While the two concepts are clearly distinguished, many ecoparalogs may be homeoalleles that coexist in the same genome following transfer and integration by nonhomologous recombination. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that 60% of ecoparalogs with resolved phylogenies were generated through HGT (Sanchez-Perez et al., 2008).
From the interactions and processes that occur among the individuals that comprise a population arise emergent properties of the group (Reuter et al., 2005). These higher-order attributes define the group as a whole and represent more than the sum of its lower-level constituents (Reuter et al., 2005). The population as an organizational level is characterized by the dynamics that occur within it, the spatial distribution of individuals, phenotypic variability, and intraspecific interactions. In the same way, the formation of higher-level population-like assemblies of microbial lineages can bring about comparable attributes. Moreover, a single-species population experiences constraints that limit the size and growth of the group, and in the case of assemblages formed by biased HGT, the availability of transfer partners as well as the compatibility of their genetic machineries can set the boundaries of the exchange group. The source of genetic material that an organism can access is therefore not limited to its own genome and that of other organisms of the same species. Genes can also be acquired from other lineages, even across taxonomic boundaries, as well as the mobile genetic elements in its environment (called the mobilome; Frost et al., 2005). This then is what constitutes the genetic repertoire of the higher-level population. The dynamic nature of biological lineages is therefore clearly reflected in the continuous influx and efflux of genetic material independent of vertical descent. This phenomenon can act as a cohesive force that facilitates not only the collective evolution of the group but also the spread of advantageous and/or selfish genetic material.
Gene flow is an essential property observed in higher-level microbial populations, with homeoalleles being exchanged between populations as well. This process introduces genetic variation into an established gene pool of a population. The frequency of homeoallele distribution and change can therefore be investigated in this higher-level population scenario, with homeoallele frequencies governed by the frequencies of HGT. By introducing novel genetic material into a genome, the process of HGT can cause massive evolutionary changes, giving rise to metabolic processes that would have otherwise taken millions of years for lineages to acquire through mutation and natural selection. HGT can therefore be exploited as an adaptive strategy by many organisms, allowing them to take advantage of new environments and/or metabolic compounds that can provide them with a competitive benefit over others at a quicker timescale than through mutation alone. Hence, both HGT and mutation can lead to the same result and selection can act on specific features acquired through either process, but HGT can accelerate genetic innovation in a lineage and in the population. When this gene transfer is biased between groups, lower-level biological units can therefore generate higher-level units that resemble population-like assemblages (Olendzenski & Gogarten, 2009; Andam et al., 2010a, b).
The case of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) The aaRS family of enzymes is responsible for the specific attachment of each amino acid to its cognate tRNA during the translation process, thus ensuring the fidelity of the genetic code (O'Donoghue & Luthey-Schulten, 2003). Their capacity to decipher the genetic code relies on their specificity for both amino acid and the corresponding tRNA (Ibba & Soll, 2004). With a few noted exceptions, all 20 aaRS are universal in all living organisms and are essential for cell growth. The synthesis of aminoacyl-tRNAs is a two-step process that involves the formation of an aminoacyl-adenylate intermediate, followed by the transfer of the amino acid to the 3′-end of the cognate tRNA (O'Donoghue & Luthey-Schulten, 2003). A compound can halt the translation process by acting on either step of the aminoacylation process through competitive binding to the synthetase (Montgomery et al., 2009).
aaRS as targets of naturally occurring antibiotics Protein translation inhibitors, such as aaRS inhibitors, are bacteriostatic agents that do not kill the target organism, but have the advantage of immediately halting toxin production that may be fatal to the host (Ochsner et al., 2007). aaRS inhibition is known to be utilized by many bacteria and fungi against competing organisms. Currently, aaRS are being aggressively pursued as promising targets for antibiotics because of the possibility for species-specific inhibition (Ochsner et al., 2007), i.e. the bacterial forms of aaRS show considerable evolutionary distance from their eukaryotic counterparts and also have sufficient differences with their mitochondrial version, therefore allowing drugs to specifically act against the bacterial aaRS without any toxic effect on the host cell (Pohlmann & Brotz-Oesterhelt, 2004). When one aaRS is inhibited during the translation process, its cognate tRNA will not be charged and thus becomes unavailable for protein synthesis (Pohlmann & Brotz-Oesterhelt, 2004). Protein synthesis eventually ceases and cell growth is arrested (Kim et al., 2003; Van de Vijver et al., 2009).
Several natural products that inhibit aaRS activity have been discovered. The only commercially marketed antibiotic directed against an aaRS is pseudomonic acid A (also known as mupirocin), a natural compound produced by Pseudomonas fluorescens NCIB 10586 (Yanagisawa & Kawakami, 2003). It selectively inhibits protein synthesis by reversibly binding to the active site of isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase (IleRS) (Ochsner et al., 2007), thus preventing the formation of Ile-tRNAIle. This compound has been reported to impede the growth of many bacterial, archaeal, and fungal IleRS (Nicholas et al., 1999; Nakama et al., 2001; Thomas et al., 2010). However, the transfer of IleRS resistance from highly resistant Stapylococcus aureus isolates to highly sensitive Staphylococcus species has been demonstrated to occur via plasmid exchange (Thomas et al., 1999). Interestingly, it was reported that the increasing levels of mupirocin resistance observed in clinical settings arose as a result of horizontal transfer of highly resistant IleRS from eukaryotes to some bacteria (Brown et al., 1998).
Two naturally occurring antibiotics that act against tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TrpRS) are chuangxinmycin, produced by Actinoplanes tsinanensis (Brown et al., 2002) and indolmycin by Streptomyces griseus ATCC 12648 (Routien et al., 1966). These antibiotics block the translation process through the competitive inhibition of bacterial TrpRS (Kanamaru et al., 2001). Indolmycin has been reported to be potent against methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA; Hurdle et al., 2004), methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA; Hurdle et al., 2004), vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus (VISA; Hurdle et al., 2004) and Helicobacter pylori (Kanamaru et al., 2001), while chuangxinmycin has been demonstrated to act against multidrug resistant pathogens (Brown et al., 2002).
Other natural compounds that demonstrate aaRS inhibitory activity have also been identified. SB-219383, isolated from Micromonospora sp., has been shown to inhibit the TyrRS in S. aureus (Berge et al., 2000; Stefanska et al., 2000a). Agrobacterium radiobacter K84 is the source of agrocin, which inhibits the leucyl-tRNA synthetase (LeuRS) in Agrobacterium tumefaciens (Reader et al., 2005). Microcin C is a member of the microcin family of modified, ribosomally synthesized peptide antibiotics produced by Enterobacteriaceae (Moreno et al., 2002) that show inhibitory property against different cellular enzymes (Metlitskaya et al., 2006). A member of the microcin family is Microcin C, which is degraded inside the cell, and this leads to the production of a modified aspartyl-adenylate that blocks the activity of aspartyl-tRNA synthetase (AspRS; Metlitskaya et al., 2006). Ochratoxin-A is derived from Aspergillus that acts against the phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase (PheRS) of bacteria and eukaryotes (McMasters & Vedani, 1999). Another potent inhibitor is SB-217452, isolated from Streptomyces sp. ATCC 700974, that blocks SerRS (Stefanska et al., 2000b).
The role of bacterial aaRS homeoalleles in antibiotic resistance The coexistence of at least two divergent genes coding for an aaRS of the same amino acid specificity in a single genome seems to correlate with antibiotic resistance. Redundant genes found in the same genome are likely a result of recent duplication or horizontal acquisition and may be maintained if there is selective advantage to retain both copies (Kondrashov & Kondrashov, 2006). Among aaRS, such homeoalleles were first described when the phylogenetic reconstruction of TyrRS showed two main types of the enzyme in the bacterial domain and that many major groups of bacteria possess both copies, although individual genomes usually have one form of the enzyme (Andam et al., 2010b). In rare cases, the two divergent versions of TyrRS coexist in a genome (Andam et al., 2010b). A sequence/structure comparative analysis of TyrRS homeoalleles was performed in order to detect a possible adaptive signature of antibiotic resistance as a selective factor in their divergence. If the evolution of resistance is present, then key differences should be detectable within the otherwise highly conserved amino acid-binding pocket, corresponding to each group of homeoalleles.
Twenty amino acids were identified as adjacent to the activated L-tyrosine binding pocket in S. aureus TyrRS, of which 15 were completely conserved within bacterial homologs and three were highly variable. The remaining two sites (S. aureus positions 36 and 190) showed a strong signature between homoalleles. Remarkably, these positions are adjacent within the TyrRS structure, and both interact with the hydroxyl group on the L-tyrosine ligand (Fig. 2). All sampled homeoalleles of Type A (the group containing S. aureus) contain a Tyr at position 36 and, with few exceptions that contain a Glu (e.g. Clostridia perfringens, Candidatus Protochlamydia amoebophila, Neisseria gonorrhoeae), a Gln at position 190. In contrast, all homeoalleles of Type B contain a Lys at position 36 and a Glu at position 190. The apparent charge compensation between the two sidechains suggests that these sites co-evolved, and support a scenario in which slight changes in the L-tyrosine-binding pocket were selected for to convey antibiotic resistance. Additionally, the substitution of the particular amino acids involved suggests a stronger selection for Tyr–Lys, as in either direction, this substitution requires at least two nucleotide changes at the first and the third position (via Asn), while Gln–Glu substitutions only require a single nucleotide change at the first position. As such, the Gln–Glu substitution should be more likely to experience occasional revertants/convergence, which is precisely what is observed. Finally, the location of the substitutions hints at the possible antibiotic mode of action, which, in this case, probably involves a tyrosyl-analog with structural/chemical differences resulting in increased binding affinity at the deepest point in the binding pocket.
The maintenance of aaRS homeoalleles in a single genome may be a function of their variable sensitivity to naturally occurring antibiotics. The resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae to MetRS inhibitors was due to the presence of a second, distantly related MetRS enzyme, which is resistant to antibiotics that act on the first MetRS enzyme (Gentry et al., 2003). The IleRS of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is also of a eukaryotic form that might have been acquired through HGT (Sassanfar et al., 1996), perhaps facilitating the loss of its original bacterial form of the enzyme. Streptomyces coelicolor carries genes that encode for two distinct TrpRS. TrpRS2 confers resistance to both chuangxinmycin and indolmycin, antibiotics produced by other species that inhibit TrpRS1 (Kitabatake et al., 2002; Vecchione & Sello, 2009). The two trpRS genes are also differentially expressed, with the sensitive trpRS2 expressed constitutively and trpRS1 transcriptionally activated by indolmycin (Kitabatake et al., 2002; Vecchione & Sello, 2010). The second MetRS2 of S. pneumoniae and the IleRS2 of S. aureus that impart drug-resistance capacity to these organisms have been found to have homologs in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax (Brown et al., 2003). The same study also reported the existence of two copies of metRS genes in C. perfringens, which causes gangrene (Brown et al., 2003). The authors did not test the enzymes' resistance to antibiotics; thus, we can only speculate on the possible selective advantage to the organism that these duplicate enzymes might confer.
The auxiliary aaRS provides protection not only against compounds produced by other organisms but also from the organism's own toxic metabolites (Yanagisawa & Kawakami, 2003) as a self-defense mechanism. The pseudomonic acid producer P. fluorescens is able to protect itself from this antibiotic by carrying a eukaryotic-like gene that codes for IleRS-R2, in addition to the bacterial form ileRS-R1. The two IleRS forms exhibit differential sensitivity to pseudomonic acid, with the eukaryotic IleRS type providing resistance to P. fluorescens against its own antibiotic (Yanagisawa & Kawakami, 2003). The albomycin-producing Streptomyces sp. strain ATCC 700974 encodes two divergent SerRS, one of which confers resistance to albomycin to host cells (Zeng et al., 2009). The authors also did not rule out the possibility that this second SerRS may also be involved in albomycin biosynthesis (Zeng et al., 2009).
The presence of multiple aaRS of the same amino acid specificity in a genome proves to be an essential defense mechanism for many microorganisms. This reflects an intriguing phenomenon in nature, i.e. different pathways and mechanisms to perform the same biological function, existing in parallel. For example, the adaptive value of antibiotic resistance might perhaps explain the coexistence of the two lysyl-tRNA synthetases from different classes in some methanogens (Galagan et al., 2002).
Biased transfer of aaRS in Bacteria Previous studies have reported the propensity of aaRS to undergo horizontal transfer (Wolf et al., 1999; Olendzenski et al., 2000; Woese et al., 2000; Dohm et al., 2006; Shaul et al., 2006; Luque et al., 2008). This is likely due to the few interactions they are subjected to inside the cell. aaRS interact only with amino acid, ATP and their cognate tRNA, in contrast to other enzymes involved in translation and transcription, which have multiple partners (Wolf et al., 1999). Interdomain transfer of an aaRS (Woese et al., 2000; Ardell & Andersson, 2006; Dohm et al., 2006) can occur despite the existence of specificity-mediated recognition elements of aaRS for their cognate tRNA (Ardell & Andersson, 2006). However, because many prokaryotes tend to swap genes with their close kin, the new gene coding for a specific aaRS acquired through HGT will not be incompatible with the tRNA and the rest of the transcription and translation machineries of the recipient organism. Hence, the novel gene will find less difficulty in integrating itself into the host genome.
Biased HGT can disseminate a specific aaRS within a higher-level taxonomic group, even if they are of different species. This would increase the likelihood of survival of the members of the group when presented with an antibiotic that specifically inhibits an aaRS. One ramification of aaRS transfer is the possibility that multidrug resistance in some bacteria might emerge as a result of the acquisition of different combinations of aaRS homologs that are resistant to different compounds. However, it must also be acknowledged that point mutations in duplicate aaRS genes can lead to lower sensitivity to various antibiotics (Schimmel et al., 1998), and multiple aaRS types coexisting in a genome that are so divergent as not to undergo concerted evolution might facilitate the emergence of new antibiotic-resistant variants that would otherwise lower organismal fitness under normal conditions.
Conclusions The fluidity of microbial genomes hinges on the ability of organisms to acquire foreign genetic material. Not surprisingly, one outcome of this process is the emergence of new pathogens and increased incidence of multi-drug-resistant bacterial strains. This necessitates the continuous discovery of novel antibacterial compounds that exhibit enhanced specificity and renewed effectiveness. aaRS promise to be effective targets for strain- and species-specific antibiotics, and we can also anticipate the possibility that, because aaRS are highly conserved across many bacterial species, broad-spectrum antibacterial compounds can be eventually developed (Pohlmann & Brotz-Oesterhelt, 2004). However, the widespread occurrence of aaRS homeoalleles with differential sensitivity towards individual antibiotics might limit the long-term utility of aaRS-targeted antibiotics.