https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu017
PanGP: A tool for quickly analyzing bacterial pan-genome profile
Abstract Summary: Pan-genome analyses have shed light on the dynamics and evolution of bacterial genome from the point of population. The explosive growth of bacterial genome sequence also brought an extremely big challenge to pan-genome profile analysis. We developed a tool, named PanGP, to complete pan-genome profile analysis for large-scale strains efficiently. PanGP has integrated two sampling algorithms, totally random (TR) and distance guide (DG). The DG algorithm drew sample strain combinations on the basis of genome diversity of bacterial population. The performance of these two algorithms have been evaluated on four bacteria populations with strain numbers varying from 30 to 200, and the DG algorithm exhibited overwhelming advantage on accuracy and stability than the TR algorithm.
1 INTRODUCTION Since the conception ‘pan-genome’ was introduced in 2005 (Medini et al., 2005), pan-genome had shed light on the genomic diversity and evolution of bacterial genome. To make pan-genome analyses more expediently, several software tools were designed. Panseq could identify single nucleotide polymorphism on core genome and strain’s specific region (Laing et al., 2010), and PGAP was designed to perform five analytic functions with only one command (Zhao et al., 2012). At the same time, a series of mathematic models had been proposed to characterize pan-genome profile of bacteria, such as the Streptococcus agalactiae pan-genome model (Tettelin et al., 2005), the Haemophilus influenzae pan-genome model (Hogg et al., 2007), heaps law model (Tettelin et al., 2008) and infinitely many genes model (Baumdicker et al., 2010). All current models could well depict the pan-genome profile of a launch of bacteria with their time complexity O(⁠forumla⁠), where n is the strain number. In this article, we developed two sampling algorithms to efficiently perform pan-genome profile analysis for larger scale genomes. These two algorithms were integrated in the software with a graphic interface, PanGP.
3 RESULTS The performance of sampling algorithms. It was found in Supplementary Fig. S1 that genome diversity, characterized by Dev_geneCluster method in Model C, exhibited strong correlation to pan-genome size, and difference in gene cluster number may primarily affect pan-genome size. Hence, we take Dev_geneCluster as the method to characterize genome diversity in the DG algorithm. The performance of two sampling algorithms was estimated from three aspects—accuracy, stability and time cost. Seen from Supplementary Figs S2–S4, the result from the DG algorithm was closer to the real data and more stable than the TR result with the same sample size. For the same species, population size almost did not affect the accuracy and stability of the two sampling algorithms. When the sample size was set to 500, the error proportion in the total gene clusters, either between the DG result and the real data or between any two sample results from the DG algorithm, were <0.1% in all test populations. Regarding time cost, the DG algorithm took slightly more time than the TR algorithm with the same sample size (Supplementary Table S1). When sample size was set to 500, the analysis for ≤50 genomes could be finished within 3 min.
Application for PanGP. Among pan-genome analysis tools, PGAP, a comprehensive pan-genome analysis pipeline with five modules, could only deal with small-scale genomes in the pan-genome profile analysis module, while PanGP was a highly efficient tool for large-scale bacterial pan-genome profile analysis with sampling algorithms. Besides TR and DG algorithms, another one named traverse all algorithm (TA algorithm) was also provided in PanGP. When TA algorithm was selected, the pan-genome profile would be analysed without sampling. PanGP required orthologs information as the input data, which could be generated by series of software, such as PGAP (Zhao et al., 2012), OrthoMCL (Li et al., 2003) and PanOCT (Fouts et al., 2012), with the format introduced in the online manual. When sampling finished, the pan-genome profile would be present as curves images (shown as Supplementary Fig. S5). The curves images could be revised and exported via the user-friendly graphic interface, and non-linear fitting with three mathematic models was also available for pan-genome size, core genome size and new gene size. More usages about PanGP were provided in the online manual.
Funding: The National Basic Research and Development Program (973 Program; 2010CB126604 to J.X.); National Programs for High Technology Research and Development (863 Program; 2012AA020409), the Ministry of Science and Technology of People’s Republic of China; Key Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences grant (KSZD-EW-TZ-009-02 to J.X).
Conflict of Interest: none declared.