https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.13289
Transcriptional control of quorum sensing and associated metabolic interactions in Pseudomonas syringae strain B728a
Summary Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae cell densities fluctuate regularly during host plant colonization. Previously we identified nine genes dependent on the quorum-sensing-associated luxR homolog ahlR during epiphytic and apoplastic stages of host colonization. Yet their contributions to host colonization remain obscure, despite ahlR regulon presence within and beyond the P. syringae pan-genome. To elucidate AhIR regulon member functions, we characterized their regulation, interactions with each other, and contributions to the metabolome. We report Psyr_1625, encoding a functional pyruvate deydrogenase-E1 subunit PdhQ, is required to prevent the accumulation of pyruvate in rich media. Furthermore it is exquisitely regulated by both repression of its own promoter by QrpR within a novel clade of the MarR regulator family, and co-transcription on a 5kb transcript originating from the AhlR-driven ahlI promoter, that reads over ahlR and qrpR. Metabolites accumulated during expression of the second AhlR-driven operon (Psyr_1620-1616, paoABCDE), only in a pdhQ mutant background, in addition to pyruvate, are herein associated with derepression of QrpR-repressed pdhQ. AHL signaling, QrpR, and transcriptional read-through events integrate to ensure AHL-dependent expression of a novel metabolism in anticipation of environmental stress, while minimizing endogenously generated cytotoxicity.
Introduction Pseudomonas syringae is a ubiquitous phytopathogen having a prominent epiphytic phase in which motility-driven exploration of the nutritionally heterogeneous and periodically water-limited plant microenvironment ensures its successful leaf surface colonization. The majority of epiphytic cells occur in aggregations on leaves, presumably due to their exploitation of nutrient rich sites. P. syringae can reach population sizes of 107 CFU/g fresh weight leaf prior to invasion of the leaf apoplast where subsequent endophytic colonization results in infection of compatible host plants (Lindow and Brandl, 2003).
Quorum sensing (QS) may contribute to the successful response of P. syringae to the spatio-temporal variation experienced on leaves. QS is a process in which microorganisms secrete and subsequently perceive low molecular weight signaling molecules as a means to gauge their population size or conditions of their local environment. Such information allows them to transition to a state where genes relevant to that environmental condition are appropriately expressed (Keller and Surette, 2006). Although there are a variety of QS regulatory circuits involving chemically diverse signaling molecules, the luxI/R signaling mechanism which utilizes N-acyl homoserine lactones (AHL) is the most studied paradigm in Gram negative bacteria. Even though numerous bacteria produce and perceive AHLs via homologs of luxI-encoded AHL synthases and luxR-encoded response regulators, the phenotypes controlled by QS signaling are highly divergent. Thus, the phenotypes controlled by QS often cannot be inferred from knowledge of the luxI/luxR homologs or their cognate signaling molecules, even within different strains of the same species (Chugani et al., 2012).
The contribution of AHL signaling to the behavior of P. syringae in and on plants has received considerable attention (Monier and Lindow, 2003; Quiñones et al., 2004; Monier and Lindow, 2004; Quiñones et al., 2005; Dulla and Lindow, 2008; Dulla et al., 2010; Palmer et al., 2011; Pérez-Velázquez et al., 2012; Yu et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2014). The luxI/R quorum regulator homologs ahlI and ahlR in P. syringae pv. syringae (Pss) B728a are responsible for the production and perception, respectively, of 3-oxo-hexanoyl acyl homoserine lactone (3oxoC6-AHL) (Kinscherf and Willis, 1999; Quiñones et al., 2004). The regulatory and environmental factors that modulate quorum signaling in Pss B728a have also been investigated. For example, QS is positively regulated by the transcriptional regulator AefR, even as AefR is a repressor of all other genes within its regulon in B728a (Quiñones et al., 2005; Yu et al., 2014). In addition, Pss B728a also produces two ezymes with acylase activity for dissimilar AHL substrates, although their role in so-called quorum quenching has not been documented (Shepherd and Lindow, 2009). While luxR orphans have been a topic of ongoing investigations (Fuqua, 2006; Subramoni and Venturi, 2009), the two orphan AHL binding domain-containing luxR homologs in the Pss B728a genome have not been investigated.
Global transcriptional profiling of Pss B728a under a variety of different conditions both in vitro and in planta have revealed that the QS regulon consists of only nine genes (Yu et al., 2014). The function of many of these genes is not apparent from their current annotation. Furthermore, although these genes are all clustered in one genomic region, their anti-parallel organization suggested that a complex pattern of regulation of this region is operative. In this study, we use directed knockouts of components of the ahlR regulon as well as transcriptional fusions to reporter genes and measured RNA abundance to characterize the hierarchical interplay between AhlI/AhlR and other components of the QS regulon, revealing a complex pattern of extensive transcriptional read-through as well as interaction between various QS-regulated genes. These studies reveal a novel MarR family member (QrpR) involved in regulating the transcription of a genetically redundant yet functionally uncharacterized pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH)-E1 homolog (PdhQ), which we show here to be capable of functionally complementing the housekeeping PDH-E1 subunit. We also address the functions of the poorly annotated genes controlled directly by AhlR, by metabolic profiling and epistasis analysis. A model integrating the multiple intrinsic regulatory mechanisms and putative functions of the surprisingly small ahlR regulon is proposed, and the specificity and role of redundant PDH-E1 proteins is explored.
Results Annotation and topology of the Pss B728a ahlR regulon While as many as ten ahlR-dependent genes have been reported (Yu et al., 2014), ahlR itself (Psyr_1622) and the annotated transcriptional regulator of the marR family (Psyr_1624) which we name quorum-independent repressor of pdhQ; Regulator (qrpR), are, in fact, constantly expressed (Fig. 1). ahlR and ahlI are convergently oriented, and production of a transcript antisense to ahlR has been documented in Pss DC3000 where this orientation is conserved (Filiatrault et al., 2010). Of the remaining ahlR-dependent genes, five (Psyr_1616-1620) which we name pyruvic acid over-accumulation paoABCDE, lie upstream of and are divergent from ahlI in an operon (Fig. 1). Three of these genes are annotated as hypothetical in the Pseudomonas genome database, but we propose their functions based on additional database queries (Table 1). Downstream of and co-oriented with ahlI, is a QS-regulated gene encoding a hypothetical protein that resembles an N-terminally truncated pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 subunit (Psyr_1623, pdhT), and a QS-regulated gene encoding a full-length pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 subunit (Psyr_1625, pdhQ) (Fig. 1 and Table 1). Strains and plasmids used to study the regulation and function of this region are described in Table 2, and visually depicted in Supporting Information Fig. S1. Conservation of this regulon among bacterial taxa is addressed in Supporting Information Fig. S2.
ahlR positively regulates ahlI and the pao operon using two adjacent divergent promoters The expression of ahlI as well as a gene within the pao operon are dependent on ahlR in trans based on the abundance of their transcripts assessed using qRT-PCR (Table 3). These genes are also more highly transcribed after addition of exogenous 3oxoC6-AHL (Table 3). Assessment of transcription using fusions to a GFP reporter gene also indicates that their promoters drive transcription that is activated in trans by 3oxoC6-AHL (Table 3). This indicates that two divergent ahlR-inducible promoters drive transcription (Fig. 1).
The ahlI promoter confers production of a long transcript containing pdhT, pdhQ, as well as regions antisense to ahlR and qrpR
Measurements of transcript abundance within the QS region were compared to GFP reporter gene fusion data (Table 3). These assessments of transcript abundance and transcriptional initiation together are consistent with a model in which the ahlI promoter initiates a transcript that is not terminated near its proximal gene's stop codon, but reads through both ahlR and qrpR into pdhQ. This would comprise a transcript sense to ahlI, pdhT and pdhQ, and antisense to both ahlR and qrpR, spanning greater than 5 kb (Table 3). Both the ahlR and qrpR regulators in the region have their own active promoters that are not responsive to AHL (Table 3). The discrepancy between the remarkably high and largely 3oxoC6-AHL-insensitive level of transcriptional initiation conferred by the pdhQ promoter region in trans with the initially low yet highly signal-responsive changes in transcript in its native chromosomal context was investigated further.
The quorum-controlled pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 ORF pdhQ contains its own dedicated qrpR-repressible promoter
In addition to the transcriptional read-through from ahlI to drive pdhQ expression, we also observed that this gene had its own promoter, which behaved unexpectedly when the transcription that it initiated was monitored with GFP fusions in trans. A region of 500 bp immediately upstream of pdhQ was cloned in front of a gfp reporter gene in the multi-copy plasmid (p-pdhQ(500)). Cells harboring p-pdhQ(500), even in strains deficient for AHL production, exhibited strong GFP fluorescence unlike those harboring ahlI::gfp plasmids that had no visible GFP fluorescence unless exogenous AHL was added (Table 3). Unlike the pdhT promoter that was inactive in either the presence or absence of AHL, the pdhQ promoter appeared to be consitutively expressed in trans both in the presence and absence of AHL.
Through various observations we hypothesized that the repressor of pdhQ was present in the region containing qrpR. We therefore included a region upstream of pdhQ that was long enough to include the entire qrpR ORF in a reporter vector to yield p-qrpR_pdhQ(595). Transcription initiated by the promoter of pdhQ was greatly reduced in the presence of the full length qrpR ORF compared to that in cells harboring the truncated qrpR on p-pdhQ(500) (data not shown). To discriminate between the inclusion of a necessary cis element or increased qrpR abundance as contributing to the enhanced repression of pdhQ, we expressed qrpR highly on plasmid pTrp_qrpR and observed repression of transcription initiated by pdhQ in trans (Table 4). This result also indicated that a promoter region of 160 base pairs contained a promoter that is qrpR repressible. Therefore qrpR binding sites in this promoter region would be within the 160 base pairs upstream of the start codon of pdhQ. MarR regulators such as QrpR typically bind to inverted repeat sequence elements proximal to the −35 and −10 sites of their target promoter regions. Indeed, sequence analysis revealed a perfect inverted 18 bp repeat sequence 8 bp after the −10 site (Supporting Information Fig. S3). In a random chemical mutagenesis approach in which elevated GFP fluorescence was scored in cells harboring both plasmid pTrp-qrpR and mutagenized p-pdhQ(500), a point mutant was identified that conferred twofold higher GFP fluorescence than cells harboring unaltered p-pdhQ(500) (Supporting Information Fig. S3). This mutation occurred within the 18 bp inverted repeat sequence. It seemed likely that changes more extensive than single base alterations of this cis-element would be required to completely eliminate its repressor-docking function.
Initially, transcription of pdhQ appeared to be exclusively ahlR- dependent since removal of ahlR abolished quorum-induced pdhQ transcript abundance. Given the prominent role of the AhlI and AhlR regulators on expression of genes in this region, we explored whether qrpR repression of the pdhQ-proximal promoter would occur in the absence of ahlR and ahlI, a condition in which 3oxoC6-AHL would also be lacking. Indeed this was the case (Table 4). QrpR thus does not need to interact with AhlR for repression of pdhQ to occur, nor does QrpR repressor function require 3oxoC6-AHL.
pao operon expression is sufficient to disable the qrpR-repression of pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 ORF pdhQ, independent of quorum sensing
Temporal studies of ahlR-dependent gene expression using gfp reporter gene promoter fusions suggested that de-repression of the pdhQ promoter was observed at later stages of QS, but not in the absence of a functional pao operon (data not shown). qRT-PCR analysis revealed that pdhQ transcript abundance increased in an AHL-dependent manner with time, and that induction was reduced approximately twofold in the absence of paoABCDE though not abolished (Fig. 2).
It seems likely that ahlR-mediated QS induction of ahlI transcript directly contributes to the abundance of pdhQ message, while additional message is contributed from a pdhQ-proximal qrpR-repressed promoter, and that this promoter does not appear to be responsive to ahlR directly, being only indirectly modulated after paoABCDE induction. To determine if pdhQ expression could be stimulated by paoABCDE alone, without contribution from ahlI and ahlR, we over-expressed the paoABCDE operon via the IPTG-inducible plasmid pMF54Ω in a ΔahlI_ahlR mutant background. Expression of pdhQ was very strongly de-repressed by elevated paoABCDE expression in the absence of the quorum regulators (Fig. 3). One possibility is that some product of the paoABCDE operon interacts with qrpR to achieve de-repression of pdhQ, though this study does not test this model.
Deletion of quorum-controlled pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 ORF pdhQ leads to accumulation of pyruvic acid
Comparison of lawns between the wild type and ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ strains after 48 h of growth on King's B agar plates revealed a metabolic phenotype; the ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant did not produce a fluorescent siderophore, reduced the medium pH, and produced a volatile best described as ‘sour’ (Fig. 4). The amendment of KB medium with bromothymol blue enabled the observation of these pH changes non-destructively, and over time in a variety of conditions (Fig. 4B, Table 5, Supporting Information Table S1). Complementation of these genes by introducing pTrp_pdhT_qrpR_pdhQ abolished the acidification of the media. To determine if any single gene could prevent acid accumulation we also expressed pdhT and pdhQ individually in plasmids pTrp_pdhT and pTrp_pdhQ and found that only the full-length pdh-E1 subunit PdhQ, but not the truncated E1 subunit PdhT, prevented acid accumulation (Table 5). We could not distinguish if acidification by this mutant occurred only after the buffering capacity of the medium was exceeded, or whether rates of acid production increased as cells entered stationary phase. Disruptions of either ahlI, ahlR, or both did not differ from the wild type strain in acidification of the media. Likewise, the paoABCDE mutant did not acidify the medium more than did the wild type strain (Table 5).
Based on the regulatory interactions between paoABCDE and pdhQ described earlier, we speculated that there could also be an interaction between these divergently oriented ahlR-regulated operons at the level of acid accumulation. Interestingly, a ΔpaoABCDE deletion in a ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant background was unable to acidify the culture medium (Table 5). To verify that paoABCDE expression is necessary for acid accumulation, we disrupted ahlI in a ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ background. This mutant is dependent on exogenous AHL signal for induction of paoABCDE (Table 3). When 3oxoC6-AHL was added to cultures of this mutant, acidification of the medium occurred (Table 5). As a control, addition of AHL to cultures of the ΔpaoABCDE ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant did not lead to acid accumulation, showing that its effect is dependent upon paoABCDE. Furthermore, when paoABCDE was expressed on plasmid pMF_NcoI_paoABCDE in a ΔpaoABCDE ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant background, acid accumulation was dependent on addition of IPTG to the medium to induce paoABCDE (Table 5). Even more intriguing, when pMF_NcoI_paoABCDE was induced by IPTG in a ΔahlI_ahlR background, acidification did not occur while pdhQ expression increased in response to paoABCDE expression (Table 5, Fig. 3). This latter pair of results is consistent with a model wherein PdhQ removes an acidic compound accumulated during expression of the pao operon, but further suggests that pdhQ expression increases, likely in a qrpR-de-repressible manner, to remove additional acid as required to prevent its accumulation, and that this can occur without 3oxoC6-AHL-dependent quorum sensing which has been abolished in the ΔahlI_ahlR background.
Pyruvic acid and other unidentified metabolites accumulate in a ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant The phenotype of media acidification suggested that additional unobserved metabolic perturbations may have occurred in the ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant; we therefore performed intracellular metabolite profiling with the following goals of (i) to identify metabolites that over-accumulated in the ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant relative to the wild type strain, (ii) to determine if production of any metabolites that over-accumulated in the ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant required the function of the pao operon required for acid accumulation and (iii) to demonstrate that any metabolite accumulation is abolished when pdhQ is provided in trans to the ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant. Metabolite profiling was performed on a variety of distinct strain/treatment combinations including: (i) wild type Pss B728a and ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ both grown in regular KB medium as well as KB containing a 3x MOPS buffer to prevent medium acidification to determine any effect of acidification per se on metabolite profiles, (ii) a ΔpaoABCDE ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ double mutant (with ahlI and ahlR inadvertently also removed by marker excision) to determine the contribution of ΔpaoABCDE to metabolite profile changes, (iii) a ΔpaoABCDE mutant to determine if removal of this operon alone has any effect on metabolite profiles, (iv) and a ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant complemented with either pTrp_pdhT_qrpR_pdhQ, pTrp_pdhT, or pTrp_pdhQ to assess if accumulation of any metabolite was differentially affected by individual genes in this region.
Most of the 496 distinct metabolites detected across all samples by GC-MS were found in similar abundance in the wild type strain and a given mutant in MOPS-buffered media (Fig. 5A). In contrast, the concentration of intracellular pyruvate was about 100-fold higher in the ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant than the wild type strain (Fig. 5A). This compound accumulated in the mutant irrespective of growth medium pH. Importantly, pyruvate accumulation did not occur in either a ΔpaoABCDE mutant, or in the strain in which both paoABCDE and pdhT_qrpR_pdhQ regions were disrupted. Furthermore, pyruvate did not accumulate when the ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant was complemented by introducing pTrp_pdhT_qrpR_pdhQ or pTrp_pdhQ (Figs. 5A, and B). Eight other unidentified compounds also exhibited the same accumulation profile as pyruvate (Fig. 5B). Five of these eight compounds were at least 100-fold higher in the ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ mutant relative to WT under these conditions (Fig. 5B). It is noteworthy that these compounds all have similar retention times (Fig. 5A) and based on similarities in their mass spectra probably represent related molecules (Fig. 5C).
pdhQ encodes a pyruvate dehydrogenase that can genetically complement the housekeeping pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 Psyr_0518 both in vitro and in planta
A conventional designation for genes encoding PDH E1 subunits is aceE. While nearly all bacterial taxa possess at least one AceE-encoding gene, only about 100 bacterial taxa in addition to Pss B728a appear to contain two or more (Fig.6A and Supporting Information Fig. S5). We thus explored whether pdhQ could functionally complement the other constantly expressed (likely housekeeping) PDH E1 identified in Pss B728a (aceE, Psyr_0518) (Winsor et al., 2011). To determine if PdhQ has pyruvate dehydrogenase activity we first performed site-directed knockout of aceE. This mutant, like that lacking the quorum-controlled pdhQ, does not accumulate a typical green/blue fluorescent pigment when grown on KB medium and older cultures have a sour odor. The aceE mutant also multiplied slowly at all phases of growth. The strong expression of pdhQ in trans in a ΔPsyr_0518 mutant harboring pTrp_pdhT_qrpR_pdhQ allowed normal growth in all media and in planta (Fig. 6B–D). Interestingly, when pdhQ was intact in the ΔPsyr_0518 (aceE) mutant, it did not exhibit better growth than the double mutant ΔpdhQΔpsyr_0518 (Fig. 6B–D). This indicates that PdhQ, at least when strongly expressed, is capable of performing the same function as AceE, although PdhQ when expressed to normal levels does not fully compensate for the defective AceE even in the apoplast (Fig. 6D).
Discussion Despite several reports proposing various functions of the AhlR regulon in P. syringae (Quiñones et al., 2005; Palmer et al., 2011; Pérez-Velázquez et al., 2012; Taguchi et al., 2014), only recently has the QS regulon of P. syringae B728a been shown to be quite small (Yu et al., 2014). The functional characterization of this system in this study reveals that a complex pattern of transcriptional read-through and feedbacks between different components of the QS regulons are operative. Furthermore, while the function of several of the genes controlled by QS remained cryptic, one of two homologous E1 subunits of pyruvate dehydrogenase is controlled by the system. The marR-family regulator, qrpR, is capable of regulating the pdhE1 ortholog pdhQ in a pao operon-dependent manner, without necessity for the ahlR and ahlI quorum regulators. The AhlR regulon thus takes the form of a modular genetic circuit containing a quorum-dependent positive feedback loop, and quorum-independent negative feedback loop (Fig. 1). pao operon function is both stimulated and inhibited by the quorum-dependent loop in a manner resembling a ‘paradoxical component’ (Hart and Alon, 2013), while the quorum-independent loop provides additional negative feedback control upon pao operon function.
Two genes within the ahlR regulon – orthologous to paoE, and qrpR, were also recently reported as falling under regulation of the ahlR ortholog psyR in P. syringae pv. tabaci 6605 (Taguchi et al., 2014). While both reports are in concordance with the finding of positive regulation of paoE, there is a discrepancy with respect to qrpR. While we found qrpR to be constantly expressed, they report psyR-dependent regulation of qrpR, perhaps owing to a non-directional measure of transcription, as was also the case in our microarray study (Yu et al., 2014). We, however, describe the regulation of several genes in this region that were not noted in their study, including expression of the entire five-gene pao operon, pdhT and pdhQ. Interestingly these genes are present in P.s. tabaci 6605 in a syntenous arrangement to those in Pss B728a. The highly conserved gene organization suggests that a similar regulatory architecture would occur in this and other P. syringae pathovars. While our data do not demonstrate a function for this operon in vitro or in planta, Taguchi et al. report that the quorum-regulated genes contribute to flagellum-dependent motility, and resistance to oxidative and nitrosative stress(Taguchi et al., 2014). Further work will be needed to know if these phenotypes exist in Pss B728a and other pathovars, and to elucidate their role in plant colonization.
Mechanistic implications of the long anti-sense ahlI-initiated transcript and discussion of negative feedback
We found strong evidence for transcriptional read-through events occurring from ahlI past the ahlR and qrpR regulatory genes in Pss B728a. A recent review of convergent luxI/R homolog pairs predicts that RNA polymerase collision or sense-antisense transcript interactions would antagonize transcription of one gene by the other (Tsai and Winans, 2010). Striking evidence in support of this hypothesis is presented for Rhodopseudomonas palustris, in which a promoter driving an antisense transcript of the luxR homolog rpaR is activated by RpaR itself, thus reducing the amount of regulator available to respond to signal and, subsequently, participate in a positive feedback (Hirakawa et al., 2012). We thus suspect that in Pss ahlR would be transcriptionally or translationally repressed after AHL accumulates to levels inducing ahlI and thus QS. In this situation ahlI/ahlR-based quorum sensing would be subject to positive feedback in early stages of quorum sensing, but would later be suppressed by negative feedback.
Such negative feedbacks are probably essential in quorum sensing systems. Negative feedback would reduce metabolic expenditures in excessive AHL production once the intended quorum has been achieved, e.g. preventing a run-away positive feedback loop. In addition, negative feedback would return cells to a so-called ground state of a lack of quorum sensing so that individuals leaving the group would no longer express traits that would be useful only within the collective (Svenningsen et al., 2008; Hirakawa et al., 2012). P. syringae may be particularly reliant on such a negative feedback after QS had been achieved as it would be expected to experience frequent changes in the size of the local community when colonizing its environment, for instance when cells would be dispersed as raindrops impinge on a leaf (Dulla et al., 2010). Negative regulation of ahlR could also dampen noise in the quorum response since modeling reveals that both signal diffusion and rapid turnover of apo-receptor synergistically dampen noise (Tanouchi et al., 2008). Regardless of their function, the importance of negative feedbacks in quorum sensing is supported by their frequent occurrence in other QS systems, often by unrelated mechanisms. For instance in Pseudomonas fuscovaginae, a pathogen of cereals, the AHL receptor PfvR positively regulates the gene encoding the AHL synthase pfvI as well as rsaL encoding a negative regulator of pfvI (Mattiuzzo et al., 2011). rsaL-based negative feedback is also operative in the plant growth-promoting rhizobacterium Pseudomonas putida WCS358 (Rampioni et al., 2012).
Multiple PDH-E1 homologs in other bacteria Bacteria encoding multiple PDH-E1 homologs, as is the case for P. syringae, are less common. While the majority of bacterial genomes encode a single full-length PDH-E1, there are at least 130 known genomes with two or more (Kanehisa et al., 2011), although most have not been functionally characterized (Supporting Inforamtion Fig. S5). Almost all pathovars of P. syringae contain at least two PDH E1-coding genes. We speculate that, as in Pss B728a, one such PDH subunit (aceE) is produced constantly in a variety of conditions (Yu et al., 2013; 2014), while the second, pdhQ, is controlled both by AhlR-activated read-through of the ahlI transcript and direct qrpR repression. Although we do not yet know all of the functions of PdhQ there is some understanding of the functions of auxiliary E1's in other taxa. In some cases, these auxiliary enzymes have altered substrate preferences. For example, a second PDH-E1 was described as part of the two-gene mde cistron essential for the two-step degradation of methionine in Pseudomonas putida. The first operon member MdeA, cleaves methionine to yield α-ketobutyrate, the substrate preferred by MdeB, a PDH-E1 enzyme, over pyruvate when over-expressed in E. coli (Inoue et al., 1997).
PDH-E1 enzyme specificity determinants QS-controlled PdhQ clearly has some pyruvate dehydrogenase activity, but this may not be its primary function. The question remains as to how, or if, one enzyme could degrade both pyruvate and other compounds. We have demonstrated that the several metabolites that accumulate in a pdhQ mutant are dependent on paoABCDE. These compounds may be intermediates of a multi-enzyme catabolic pathway that are typically transient during normal cellular activity, but which might accumulate when the final product is not removed. Is it then possible for PdhQ to have two substrates – both pyruvate, and the final product of an end product-limited pathway? Intriguingly, an E636 mutation in E. coli PDH-E1 enables it to continue to catabolize pyruvate, while increasing its rate of catalysis of carboligase side-reactions due to a lower substrate specificity, in vitro (Nemeria, 2005). Remarkably, this same mutant was found independently in a non-directed approach to rescue growth of E. coli having a blocked 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway. Spontaneous mutants of PDH-E1 were frequently found that rescued lethal mutants lacking 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase activity normally present early in the pathway (Sauret-Güeto et al., 2006). An additional report describes the role of unstructured loops in ‘capping’ substrates in the active site, thus preventing non-specific carboligase side-reactions (Kale et al., 2007). The authors characterized several key residues within inner loop positions 401– 413 by identifying single residue mutants in kinetic, spectroscopic, and crystallographic studies. The engineered enzyme variant K404Q exhibited a reduced catalytic rate constant (kcat) of active-site analog utilization, but pertinent to this study, also exhibited altered ratios of the two carboligase side products acetolactate and acetoin. Ongoing structural modeling and phylogeny efforts may reveal whether the quorum-controlled PdhQ possesses unique features that could allow it to utilize other substrates in addition to pyruvate. Such additional substrates are likely to be found within the pool of compounds that accumulate in the pdhQ mutant.
Concluding remarks While relatively small, the quorum regulon of Pss B728a is quite complex, exhibiting both quorum-dependent and quorum-independent interactions among components of the AhlR regulon, leading to both positive and apparent negative feedback loops. In particular, the QS induction of the pao operon is subject to seemingly paradoxical direct positive regulation, alongside an opposing indirect negative interaction by removal of its product(s) via QS activation of PdhQ. Such opposing regulatory interactions constitute a ‘paradoxical component’, which may have a remarkable range of complex regulatory roles from temporal pulses of target activity, to dose-specific outcomes (Hart and Alon, 2013). Although the reasons for this regulation are not understood, these findings are consistent with the tightly controlled expression of a metabolism that could otherwise be detrimental. Further work to understand the apparent linkage of QS to the metabolism of Pss, especially under natural conditions, should be fruitful.
Experimental procedures Media, antibiotics and culture conditions Pss B728a was grown at 28°C in King's B medium (KB) broth (KING et al., 1954) with shaking (200 rpm), or with amendment of 15 g L−1 Difco Agar. In some studies the growth medium used was a modified Hrp-inducing minimal medium (HMM) containing the carbon sources succinate, fructose and mannitol, the nitrogen sources ammonium and glutamine, basal salts, and 10–50 μM FeCl3 as previously described (Yu et al., 2013). Noble Agar was the solidifying agent for Modified HMM agar. E. coli was cultured on LB agar at 37°C. 3oxoC6-AHL (N-(β-Ketocaproyl)-l-homoserine lactone, Aldrich) was added to some medium at a final concentration of 10 μM in ethyl acetate. Antibiotics were used at the following concentrations as appropriate: Kanamycin (Kan) (50 μg/mL), Spectinomycin (Spc) (100 μg/mL), Rifampicin (Rif) (100 μg/mL), Natamycin (Nat) (20 μg/mL), tetracycline (Tet) (15 μg/mL) and Nitrofurantoin (NFT) (50 μg/mL).
Regarding culture conditions to compare actively growing i.e. pre-quorum induction cells to stationary phase i.e. quorum-induced cells upon KB agar as lawns, cultures were grown beforehand in HMM liquid medium to prevent AHL accumulation followed by two washes with 10 mM KPO4 and inoculation onto KB as lawns. Wells of 24-well plates containing 0.5 mL KB agar/well were inoculated at 1 × 107 CFU/well and their fluorescence and optical density determined at various times after inoculation. For qRT-PCR, exterior wells of 24-well plates prepared as above were harvested into RNAprotect solution. For early/exponential/active growth/prequorum induction conditions, 32 lawns per strain per biological replicate were harvested at 2 h post inoculation. For stationary phase/quorum induction conditions two lawns per strain per biological replicate were harvested at 42 h post inoculation. Cell densities were approximated prior to RNA processing.
Hydroxylamine mutagenesis Sodium hydroxide (0.17 g) and hydroxylamine (NH2OH) (0.35 g) were dissolved in 5 mL of distilled water, and the pH adjusted to 7.0 with HCl or ammonium hydroxide added dropwise, followed by filter sterilization. The solution was divided into 0.5 mL aliquots in 1.5 mL sterile plastic Eppendorf tubes and frozen at −20°C until immediately before use. Thirty micro litres of a plasmid solution having a total DNA content of between 1 and 30 μg was mixed into a 0.5 mL aliquot of the thawed NH2OH solution by pipetting, and allowed to incubate for 24 h at 37°C. Plasmid purification was performed using a Qiagen PCR cleanup kit by the protocol recommended by the manufacturer.
Chemistry Inoculums of bacterial strains for metabolomics analysis were grown as lawns on KB overnight. Cells were scraped from plates, suspended in 10 mM KPO4 buffer, and the OD600 of each suspension was adjusted to 2.0. Fifty µL of the suspension was spread evenly over the surface of KB with or without 3x MOPS (25 g/L MOPS (3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid) buffer (MP Biomedicals), and incubated for 48 h at 28°C. Intracellular metabolites were obtained by a method allowing simultaneous quenching and extraction of metabolites into methanol similar to that used in other studies (Maharjan and Ferenci, 2003; Villas-Bôas et al., 2005; Winder et al., 2008; Tremaroli et al., 2009; Sellick et al., 2010; Booth et al., 2011). HPLC grade methanol was chilled by dispensing 500 μL into eppendorf tubes partially submerged in a 95% ethanol/dry ice slurry at about −70°C. Cells were scraped off petri dishes onto the tip of a pre-weighed 1 mL pipette tip, quickly re-weighed to obtain cell mass, and submerged into 100% methanol, for a total collection of about 0.015 g biomass in 500 μl and frozen in an ethanol/dry ice bath. Lysis was performed using a Sonics Vibra-cellTM to sonicate each sample, kept cold in a dry ice/ethanol bath, with 15 s pulses and 5 s pauses for 4 min, at 20% amplitude. Each sample was then vortexed vigorously for 5 s, transferred to a microcentrifuge pre-cooled to −9°C, and centrifuged at 16 060 × g for 5 min. The methanolic supernatant was removed to a clean tube by pipetting while cold. Samples were stored at −80°C. Methanolic extracts were submitted to the UC Davis core metabolite facility for un-targeted metabolite profiling: samples were derivatized using N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroactamide and Methoxyamine hydrochloride, and analyzed using LECO Pegasus IV GC-time of flight mass spectrometer with Gerstel automatic liner exchange and cold injection system (Fiehn, 2000).
pH determinations of agar cultures Three-dye system: Three cores (10 mm diameter) of bacterial cultures on agar plates were each re-suspended in 500 μL sterile ddH2O, which was vortexed and 1 μL/100 μL of bromothymol Blue, bromocresol purple, or congo red was added to the extracted core/water mixture. A standard curve using pH buffers was used to calibrate the absorbance of each dye, measured using a BioTek® Synergy two plate reader at the absorbance maximum for each dye in both the acidic and basic forms. The ratios of the absorbance of bromothymol blue and bromocresol purple were linearly related to pH over a given range, while congo red absorbance was used to verify that the pH of the agar cores was not below 5.2. Alternatively, an UltraBASIC-5 pH meter (Denver Instrument) calibrated with three buffers at pH 4, 7 and 10, was used to assess pH of such cores after suspension in deionized water.
Quantification of 3oxoC6-AHL Strains were grown on KB agar overnight, rinsed with 10 mM KPO4 buffer, spotted onto the center of KB agar plates as 10 μL spots at 1 × 106 cfu/mL, dried and incubated inverted for 24 h at 28°C and assessed with the E. coli LuxR-based AHL biosensor JB524 (Wu et al., 2000; Shepherd and Lindow, 2009). JB524 was grown overnight in LB with tetracycline at 37°C, diluted to OD600 = 0.1 in LB, and applied as a lawn to P. syringae strains by overspray using an artists’ airbrush. Oversprayed plates were incubated overnight at 37°C and illuminated with a UV shortwave hand lamp to measure GFP fluorescence halo diameters (Dulla, 2007).
Measurement of endophytic populations Bacteria were grown to mid-exponential phase (ca. 5 × 108 CFU/mL in KB broth), centrifuged, and washed twice in 10 mM KPO4 buffer. Inoculum was adjusted to 106 CFU/mL in 100 μM KPO4 buffer pH 7.0. Phaseolus vulgaris cv. Bush Blue Lake 274, were grown (five plants/pot) in a greenhouse with regular watering. Cells were introduced into the apoplast of leaves by syringe infiltration and infiltrated areas were denoted with a permanent marker. Inoculated plants were incubated at room temperature under ambient humidity. Cells were harvested by removing discs (10 mm diameter) at random locations within in the inoculated areas. Leaf discs were each ground in 500 μL 10 mM KPO4, and cell numbers quantified by dilution plating as above.
Monitoring cell density and fluorescence Cell concentrations of liquid broth cultures were diluted and measured as absorbance at 600 nm on a BioTek® Synergy two plate reader. Fluorescence excitation of GFP was performed at 485/20 nm, and emission measured at 528/20 nm. Data was exported to a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and processed to correct for background fluorescence, absorbance of the media, and to normalize fluorescence for cell density.
Molecular procedures DNA was isolated using Qiagen miniprep kits. DNA was eluted in either nuclease free water or 1:20 mixture of supplied elution buffer in nuclease-free water. pPROBE plasmids were made by amplification of promoter regions using primers detailed in Supporting Information Table S2 and cloned into either pPROBE-OT or pPROBE-Tagless vectors prepared previously (Miller et al., 2000). Verification was by sequencing from gfp towards the MCS using primer ‘GFP_tagless_seq_rev’ (Supporting Information Table S2). To fuse the strong trp promoter from the E. coli trp operon to target genes for constant over-expression, the full promoter sequence, contained within the primer denoted ‘Trp-driven qrpR’ in Supporting Information Table S2 was either attached directly to the target gene using an EcoRI restriction site as for qrpR, or tiled onto the gene by successive rounds of PCR, as in the ‘Description’ column of Supporting Information Table S2, to extend the promoter to completion and include the EcoRI restriction site for insertion into pVSP61, similar to other studies (Chatnaparat et al., 2012). pFLP2Ω was generated by excising the approximately 2 Kb Ω fragment from pHP45Ω (Prentki and Krisch, 1984) by BamHI digestion of both vectors and ligating the Ω fragment into the BamHI site of pFLP2 (Hoang et al., 1998). The IPTG-inducible vectors were prepared first by introducing the Ω fragment digested with HindIII into pMF54 also digested with HindIII (Franklin et al., 1994).Overlap extension was performed in the same manner as that used in the generation of the Keio collection mutants described previously with upstream (A) and downstream (C) regions ranging from 800 to 1200 bp fused to a central (B) Flp-excisable kanamycin marker cassette which was amplified from either pKD13 for non-polar deletions as in ΔpaoABCDE, ΔahlI, ΔahlR_ahlI, ΔpdhT_qrpR_pdhQ, or pKD4 to avoid creating polar deletions as in ΔPsyr_0518 (Datsenko and Wanner, 2000; Baba et al., 2006). For overlap extension, the A, B and C PCR fragments were adjoined by PCR after cleanup of each amplicon; approximately 100 ng from each amplicon was mixed into a single 50 μL PCR reaction with Phusion® High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase from New England Biolabs®, Inc., 2.5 μL DMSO (supplied w/Phusion), 1 μL 10 mM dNTP's from Promega, 10 μL 5xHF buffer (supplied with enzyme). The thermo-cycler used was a DNA Engine® Thermal Cycler, PTC-200. After 15 cycles with conditions of typically 98°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s, 72°C for 60 s (elongation) the reaction was paused during elongation, and 1 μL of external primers, each at 10 mM, were added to the reaction. The reaction was resumed for an additional 20 cycles with 100 s elongations. Overlap extension products were resolved and identified by electrophoresis on a 1% agarose gel with fragment size (A)+(B)+(C) typically ∼3.5 Kb determined using a Fermentas 1 Kb O'gene ruler standard as a reference. Fragments were excised and purified using a Qiagen Gel extraction kit. Purified product was ligated into SmaI-digested pTOK2 using the New England Biolabs Quick Ligation kit with the included PEG buffer. Transformants were selected on LB with Km and Tet simultaneously to produce predominantly vectors containing inserts, which were confirmed by PCR and sequencing with ‘Tok2_smaI’ primer pair and ‘pKD13/4_fwd_seq_out’ primers (Supporting Information Table S2). In the case of ΔahlR, the region upstream and downstream of, and including, ahlR was amplified and cloned into the pENTR/D directional cloning vector from Invitrogen. A linear vector with KpnI restriction sites was generated by PCR primers ‘ahlR upstream reverse KpnI’ and ‘ahlR downstream forward KpnI’ diverging to omit the ahlR open reading frame. The linear amplicon was digested with KpnI, and joined to KpnI-digested pKD13 Km cassette amplified with the ‘KpnI-FRT-Km-FRT’ primer pair (Supporting Information Table S2). The final construct was verified and an Invitrogen recombinase reaction was used to introduce the double-crossover construct region into pLVC/D.
Electroporation With the exception of the suicide vectors pTOK2 and pLVC/D which were mated from E. coli S17-1 to Pss B278a, plasmids were introduced into wild type Pss B728a and mutants by electroporation. Briefly, bacteria from lawns on KB plates were re-suspended in 10% filter-sterilized ice-cold glycerol and washed 3 times in 10% glycerol, before a final resuspension in 10% glycerol, where cells from a given lawn were included in a 4 µL final cell suspension. In a separate ice-cold eppendorf tube, 2–5 μL of vector DNA [10–200 ng/μL] was mixed with 100 μL of cell suspension, and the mixture was then added to electro-cuvettes and electroporated using a BioRad GenePulser with the following settings: 200 Ω, 25 μFerrads, and 2.0 V. Room temperature LB (E. coli) or KB (Pss B728a) (900 μL) broth was added to cuvettes and mixed by pipetting. A 1 mL aliquot was removed to a new eppendorf tube and incubated with shaking for 1 h. Recovered cells were plated on appropriate media with antibiotics to select for plasmid retention.
Generation of unmarked deletion mutants E. coli S17-1 (Simon et al., 1986; Davison, 2002), containing the appropriate suicide vector was grown at 37°C overnight on plates and re-suspended in 10 mL KB in a 50 mL falcon tube without pipetting, followed by 20 min still incubation with gentle swirling and occasional agitation with a sterile pipette tip. B728a and mutants were grown at 28°C overnight on KB, and re-suspended in the same manner and density. Six mL of B728a and 2 mL E. coli was mixed and suspensions (50 μL spots) were placed on top of fresh (same-day) KB plates and allowed to dry and then incubated at 28°C for 24–36 h. Spots were scraped into 10 mM KPO4 buffer and spread across KB plates containing NFT and Km to select for both single and double crossover B728a transformants. Colonies that appeared by 48–72 h were then screened on KB containing NFT to ensure absence of E. coli, and simultaneously on KB containing Tet for absence of the pTOK2 marker. The kan marker was excised by electroporating pFLP2Ω into strains containing double crossover events. Transformants cultured on Spc were screened for absence of Km resistance, and then grown in two successive cultures of 24 h as lawns. Single colonies were then recovered and screened for Spc sensitivity, Km sensitivity and NFT resistance.
Chromosomal placement of the introduced DNA was confirmed by PCR using primers complementary to chromosomal sequences external to the pTOK2 constructs and primers internal to the constructs. A second check was to demonstrate a lack of amplification of the target genes.
Quantitative reverse transcriptase real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) RNA was harvested using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit, with 7 mg/mL Lysozyme from chicken egg white (Sigma) for cell lysis. Contaminating DNA was removed either during the protocol supplied with the Qiagen RNase-free DNase Set or at the end of the procedure using the provided protocol for New England Biolabs DNase-I(RNase Free). RNA concentration was evaluated using an ND-1000 Spectrophotometer from NanoDrop. To generate cDNA from RNA, 1 μg RNA was used as a template for Reverse Transcriptase Superscript II (Life Technologies) following the provided protocol, with random hexamers, and with no subsequent RNA removal. qRT-PCR was performed with 10 μL 2x Sybr Green (QuantiTect) SYBR Green qRT-PCR Kit master mix using a final concentration of 500 nM for each paired primer in Supporting Information Table S3 (total 1 μL), 4 μL nuclease free H2O, and 5 ng cDNA template (5 μL), per 20 μL reaction. Each reaction was performed four times in 96-well opaque white plates (AB Gene SuperPlate) with optical adhesive covers (Applied Biosystems) and centrifuged at ca. 3000 × g before amplification. Water in all procedures was Nuclease-Free (Ambion). PCR was performed on a Applied Biosystems 7300 with cycling conditions and data acquisition as recommended by the manufacturer. RT-minus controls were always performed with at least the rpoD primer pair to ensure absence of contaminating nucleic acids. Data from each primer pair was normalized relative to that of a single strain/treatment, and variation in cDNA abundance across strains/treatments was normalized to a single largely invariant gene, rpoD (omitted from the presented data), while the additional invariant genes gyrA, Psyr_3981, and Psyr_1978 were retained in the analysis during normalization. Calculation of fold-change and standard error of the mean followed the urn:x-wiley:0950382X:media:mmi13289:mmi13289-math-0006 method (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001).
Phylogenetics, homology, orthology, functional predictions and other relationships Orthologous or syntenous gene regions were located using the IMG ortholog regions viewer (Markowitz et al., 2012). Promoter prediction was performed using the BPROM online tool from Softberry (© 2012 www.softberry.com), inverted repeats were found by manual inspection, and sequence and ORF information was sourced from pseudomonas.com (Winsor et al., 2011).
Annotation references utilized in the generation of Table 1 are as follows: ProteinModelPortal (Arnold et al., 2009), ModBase (Pieper et al., 2011), STRING (Szklarczyk et al., 2011), KEGG (Kanehisa et al., 2011), InterPro (Hunter et al., 2012), CATH (Cuff et al., 2011), ProtoNet (Rappoport et al., 2012), IMG (Markowitz et al., 2012).