https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00989-17
Novel Antibiotic Resistance Determinants from Agricultural Soil Exposed to Antibiotics Widely Used in Human Medicine and Animal Farming
ABSTRACT Antibiotic resistance has emerged globally as one of the biggest threats to human and animal health. Although the excessive use of antibiotics is recognized as accelerating the selection for resistance, there is a growing body of evidence suggesting that natural environments are “hot spots” for the development of both ancient and contemporary resistance mechanisms. Given that pharmaceuticals can be entrained onto agricultural land through anthropogenic activities, this could be a potential driver for the emergence and dissemination of resistance in soil bacteria. Using functional metagenomics, we interrogated the “resistome” of bacterial communities found in a collection of Canadian agricultural soil, some of which had been receiving antibiotics widely used in human medicine (macrolides) or food animal production (sulfamethazine, chlortetracycline, and tylosin) for up to 16 years. Of the 34 new antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) recovered, the majority were predicted to encode (multi)drug efflux systems, while a few share little to no homology with established resistance determinants. We characterized several novel gene products, including putative enzymes that can confer high-level resistance against aminoglycosides, sulfonamides, and broad range of beta-lactams, with respect to their resistance mechanisms and clinical significance. By coupling high-resolution proteomics analysis with functional metagenomics, we discovered an unusual peptide, PPPAZI 4, encoded within an alternative open reading frame not predicted by bioinformatics tools. Expression of the proline-rich PPPAZI 4 can promote resistance against different macrolides but not other ribosome-targeting antibiotics, implicating a new macrolide-specific resistance mechanism that could be fundamentally linked to the evolutionary design of this peptide.
IMPORTANCE Antibiotic resistance is a clinical phenomenon with an evolutionary link to the microbial pangenome. Genes and protogenes encoding specialized and potential resistance mechanisms are abundant in natural environments, but understanding of their identity and genomic context remains limited. Our discovery of several previously unknown antibiotic resistance genes from uncultured soil microorganisms indicates that soil is a significant reservoir of resistance determinants, which, once acquired and “repurposed” by pathogenic bacteria, can have serious impacts on therapeutic outcomes. This study provides valuable insights into the diversity and identity of resistance within the soil microbiome. The finding of a novel peptide-mediated resistance mechanism involving an unpredicted gene product also highlights the usefulness of integrating proteomics analysis into metagenomics-driven gene discovery.
INTRODUCTION Antimicrobial resistance is a serious threat to human and animal health on a global scale, with bacteria now resistant to the “last-resort” antibiotics, including carbapenems and polymyxins (1–4). It is estimated that without any international-level efforts to revert our current situation, antibiotic resistance would kill an additional 10 million people and cost the global economy 100 trillion U.S. dollars by 2050 (5). To safeguard the future of medicines required for treating otherwise fatal infections, there is an urgent need to advance our understanding of the many mechanisms that are exploited by bacteria to promote resistance.
The ancestral origin of clinical resistance is largely unknown and remains an subject that is elusive to both the medical and research communities. In the perspective of evolutionary genetics, bacteria are capable of adapting to stressful conditions through chromosomal mutations and/or acquisition of genetic materials that can provide them with survival advantages. As such, exposure to antibiotics is a key evolutionary driver for the development of various resistance mechanisms, including, but not limited to, enzymatic drug modification, alteration of drug targets, reduced cell membrane permeability, and transporters-mediated drug efflux (6). These resistance mechanisms are typically encoded by the so-called antibiotic/antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) and can be disseminated among microorganisms through horizontal gene transfer. The use of antibiotics will accelerate the selection for ARGs-carrying bacterial pathogens in clinical settings (7). Likewise, anthropogenic inputs of antibiotics into the environment through wastewater effluent, agricultural use of manure and biosolids, and aquaculture will increase the diversity and size of the environmental ARG reservoir, contributing to the spread of antibiotic resistance (8–10).
Antibiotic resistance is ancient and prevalent in the natural environment, and soil is a significant reservoir of ARGs (11, 12). Soil is a very complex and dynamic environmental matrix, typically containing billions of microorganisms and thousands of bacterial species in each kilogram (13). With such microbial diversity and richness, it is not surprising that soil harbors a large diversity of ARGs (14). In fact, recent studies analyzing soil samples collected from sites geographically or temporally distant from human activities recovered not only genetic material orthologous to known ARGs found in contemporary pathogenic bacteria but also novel resistance mechanisms that have potential clinical implications (15–17).
In the present study, we sought to explore the ARG content of agricultural soil from an experimental farm located in London, Canada, by using functional metagenomics. Soil samples collected from antibiotic-amended and control field plots (18, 19) were mined for ARGs that can promote resistance against clinically important antimicrobial agents. We report here the identification of 34 new ARGs and the functional characterization of some of these resistance determinants. We uncovered several previously unknown resistance genes, notably, one that encodes a novel peptide-associated macrolide resistance mechanism.
RESULTS To explore the content of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) borne by soil microorganisms, three metagenomic fosmid libraries were constructed by cloning soil microbial DNA into Escherichia coli (Table 1). These libraries encompassed over 36 Gb of metagenomic DNA, equivalent to the combined size of about 7,200 E. coli genomes, assuming an average genome size of 5 Mb. Phenotypic selection for resistance against 12 antimicrobial agents belonging to six different antibiotic classes recovered ca. 250 fosmid clones from these metagenomic libraries. After restriction pattern analyses were performed to reduce clonality among candidates selected by the same antibiotic, retransformation confirmed at least 44 individual fosmids that are capable of conferring antibiotic resistance. High-throughput fosmid sequencing also revealed selection redundancy of using different and (un)related antibiotics, implying that some of the recovered fosmids can promote multidrug resistance. Of the 31 nonredundant fosmids that can confer resistance, 28 had their metagenomic DNA insert sequence resolved to completion (ranging from 24.2 to 43.9 kb in size), whereas the remaining three were partially assembled into separated contigs (8.8 to 26.2 kb) (see Data Set S1 in the supplemental material).
Based on the retransformant's antibiotic susceptibility profiles (Fig. 1A; see Table S1 in the supplemental material), the fosmid-conferred resistance against aminoglycosides, sulfonamides, and most of the observed β-lactams was not associated with co- or cross-resistance against other classes of antibiotics (Fig. 1B). On the contrary, all tetracycline-resistant fosmid clones displayed reduced susceptibility toward at least one additional class of antibiotic, including macrolides (Fig. 1B). Among the nine clones that exhibited a classic multidrug resistance phenotype (group VI), resistance against a third-generation cephalosporin, ceftazidime (CAZ), was detected only in the MACRO-TET A6 clone (Fig. 1A). Macrolide-specific resistance was observed in six fosmid clones, with MACRO-TYL 10 also demonstrating mildly enhanced sensitivity toward an aminoglycoside (Fig. 1A).
Using random transposon mutagenesis, 36 putative ARGs were identified from the resistance-associated fosmids (Table 2). Functional annotations suggested that the majority of the identified ARGs encode efflux-mediated mechanisms, while two known and five presumed enzymatically based resistance determinants were also uncovered (Fig. 1C). Additional open reading frame (ORFs) that showed no apparent linkage with any prominent resistance mechanisms were affiliated with resistance against macrolides (Table 2). To ascertain their ARG identity and to gain insight into the underlying resistance principles encoded by some of these soil-derived resistance determinants, a subcloning strategy was employed with the corresponding characterization findings presented in the following sections.
Efflux-mediated resistance. Individual versus combinational subcloning of two putative ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter-encoding ORFs identified from fosmid MACRO-TET A7 (i.e., orf-45TET A7 and orf-46TET A7) revealed a corequisite of these two ARGs for conferring multidrug resistance (Table 3). The restored antibiotic sensitivity of transposon mutants that had either one of the two transporter-encoding ARGs inactivated supports the notion that these two ARGs constitute a single functional efflux system. Susceptibility testing against the anticancer drugs daunorubicin (DAU) and doxorubicin (DOX) further demonstrated the capability of this ABC multidrug efflux pump to protect the bacterial host against the anthracycline class of antibiotics (Fig. 2A). It was discovered that homologues of this two-component efflux system of MACRO-TET A7 were present in seven other multidrug-resistant fosmid clones (Table 2), all of which displayed similar reductions in susceptibility toward both DAU and DOX (Fig. 2B).
Enzymatic resistance mechanisms: drug or target modifications. ARGs identical to the well-characterized resistance determinants aph-3′, which encodes an aminoglycoside O-phosphotransferase (20), and sul2, which encodes a type II sulfonamide-resistant variant of dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) (also known as FolP) (21), were uncovered (Table 2). Both ARGs were identified within genomic neighborhoods where elements implicated in lateral gene transfer (e.g., insertion sequence IS903, transposase, integrase, and conjugative transfer protein) and homologous recombination (e.g., DNA helicases and restriction endonuclease) were in close proximity (see Data Set S1 and Table S2 in the supplemental material).
Expression of orf-7KAN 4 derived from the fosmid clone SCT-KAN 4 was confirmed to promote resistance against three clinically significant aminoglycosides not only in E. coli but also in the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Table 4). Given its sequence similarity (∼60% shared identity) to an aminoglycoside 6′-N-acetyltransferase (Table 2), these results suggest that orf-7KAN 4 encodes a potentially new member of this aminoglycoside-modifying enzyme family, which confers antibiotic resistance through drug inactivation.
The broad-spectrum β-lactam resistance determinants recovered from the meropenem-selected fosmid clones (Fig. 1A, group III) were both inhibited by EDTA but not by the classic serine-type β-lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid (Table 5), in agreement with their predicted functional entities as metallo-β-lactamases (Table 2). The extensive β-lactam resistance phenotype was also recapitulated in E. coli and P. aeruginosa strains carrying the subcloned orf-27MEM A1, which was found proximal to additional β-lactamase-related ARG-like genetic elements in MACRO-MEM A1 (Data Set S1 and Table S2).
A novel sulfonamide resistance gene, here designated folPSMZ B27, was discovered from the fosmid clone UTC-SMZ B27. FolPSMZ B27 shares 35% sequence identity with the E. coli DHPS (22), but, reminiscent of the case for the two sul2-carrying fosmid clones, folPSMZ B27-expressing E. coli cells were recalcitrant to the bacteriostatic effect of sulfonamide antibiotics (Fig. 3), which is mediated through the inhibition of dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS)-dependent folate biosynthesis. Based on its ability to confer growth competence to a thymidine-auxotrophic folP-knockout E. coli strain (23) under a thymidine-deficient condition (Fig. 4B and C), it was verified that folPSMZ B27 encodes a functional DHPS. The ability to withstand the antagonistic effect of sulfonamides specific to DHPSs (Fig. 4D and E) also implies that FolPSMZ B27 represents an insensitive variant of these enzymes.
By selecting for MACRO-TET A6-derived transposon mutants with restored CAZ sensitivity, a new cephalosporin resistance determinant, ORF11 (here designated pbpTET A6), was identified adjacent to an ABC multidrug transporter-encoding operon (i.e., ORF12 and -13) (Table 2). PBPTET A6 consists of putative N-terminal transglycosylase and C-terminal transpeptidase domains, resembling the bifunctional class A penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) (24). Subcloning of pbpTET A6 confirmed the ability of this ARG-encoding product to render E. coli resistant to selected third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins (Table 6). Introduction of pbpTET A6 into P. aeruginosa further demonstrated its versatility and potential in promoting resistance against the same spectrum of antibiotics in a clinically significant pathogen (Table 6).
Unknown macrolide resistance mechanisms. The MACRO-TYL 10-derived ORF-16TYL 10 has 64% sequence identity to the GTPase HflX of a Chlamydia-related bacterium, Simkania negevensis, and promoted mild resistance against macrolides when subcloned into different E. coli hosts (Table 7). Intriguingly, expression of ORF-16TYL 10 in strain AG100A, a macrolide-sensitive derivative of AG100 that is devoid of the significant multidrug resistance-nodulation-division (RND) efflux system component AcrAB (25), did not result in any appreciable level of macrolide resistance. Consistent with this, the MACRO-TYL 10-associated reduction of macrolide susceptibilities was also compromised by the RND pump inhibitor phenyl-arginine-β-naphthylamide (PAβN). Yet, orf-16TYL 10 expression did not provide any resistance against other ribosome-targeting antibiotics, including tetracycline, lincomycin, and chloramphenicol (Fig. 1A and Table 7), despite some of them being excellent substrates of the AcrAB efflux pump (26). Collectively, these observations rule out a general upregulation of AcrAB's efflux activity in the orf-16TYL 10-expressing cell and indicate that ORF-16TYL 10 constitutes a new macrolide-specific resistance mechanism which is somehow dependent on the macrolide extrusion mediated by AcrAB.
From the macrolide-resistant fosmid MACRO-AZI 4, transposon mutagenesis identified the in silico-predicted orf-28AZI 4, orf-29AZI 4, and orf-30AZI 4 as potential resistance determinants (Fig. 5A). A blastX homology search against the NCBI nonredundant (nr) protein database using these three theoretical ORFs as queries resulted in no significant similarity found for orf-28AZI 4 and two hypothetical proteins for orf-29AZI 4 and orf-30AZI 4. Through constructing a series of pCF430-based subclones (pCL043 to pCL047) (Fig. 5A), it was deduced that the macrolide resistance, which is independent of the RND pump-mediated efflux, was attributed solely to the region encompassing orf-28AZI 4 (Table 8). Compared to the control strain (Fig. 5B), the pCL047 transformant was clearly less susceptible to the growth-inhibitory effect of azithromycin (Fig. 5C). Furthermore, the growth deficiency associated with MACRO-AZI 4 (Fig. 5D) and only certain subclones (Fig. 5E) failed to correlate with the generally observed macrolide-resistant phenotype (Fig. 5A and Table 8).
To verify the expression of any hypothetical protein that could be related to resistance, total proteomic analyses were performed to search for fosmid-specific proteins in the MACRO-AZI 4 fosmid clone and its resistant derivatives (pCL043 and pCL047). Unexpectedly, no peptide fragment corresponding to the theoretical translational product of orf-28AZI 4 was detected (see Data Set S2 in the supplemental material). Instead, a 61-residue-long polyproline peptide, here designated PPPAZI 4, encoded by an alternative reading frame present within orf-28AZI 4 (Fig. 5A) was consistently expressed in all three resistant clones. Closer examination of this unusual proline-rich peptide revealed that the bulk of PPPAZI 4 is composed of 15 direct-repeats of an (im)perfect “PPX” motif (Fig. 5F) and that it shares no homology with proteins in the NCBI nr database. While the macrolide-resistant phenotype and PPPAZI 4 expression were fully recapitulated in cells carrying pCL048, deletion of the first 38 bp of the PPPAZI 4 gene and its upstream sequence from pCL047 (yielding pCL049) resulted in no detectable PPPAZI 4 expression and, most importantly, a complete loss of resistance (Fig. 5A and Table 8). To examine the selectivity of PPPAZI 4-associated resistance, susceptibility against two additional and structurally distinct macrolides, telithromycin (TLT) (a 14-member ring ketolide) and josamycin (JOS) (a 16-member ring), was also examined. Again, reduced susceptibility against TLT and JOS was observed with only the PPPAZI 4-expressing cells and not their nonexpressing counterparts, consistent with the case for other macrolide antibiotics. Taking the results together, although the mechanism underlying this peptide-associated macrolide resistance is currently unclear (see Discussion for proposed mechanisms), PPPAZI 4 expression is evidently linked to general resistance against macrolides, implicating the PPPAZI 4 gene as a novel ARG.
DISCUSSION The present study set out to uncover ARGs from soil exposed to antibiotics heavily used in human medicine or food animal production. The idea of mining this antibiotic-amended agricultural soil for novel ARGs is justified not only by the clinical significance of these antimicrobial agents (27) and their high potential for soil exposure through manure or biosolid fertilization but also by the fact that the soil microbial communities displayed adaptability and responsiveness toward these specific drug exposures in recent studies (18, 19, 28). Using functional metagenomics, a number of ARGs were discovered, most of which encode (multi)drug transporters of all five superfamilies. This finding is consistent with those of others (29, 30), supporting drug efflux as one of the most prominent strategies employed by environmental bacteria to resist antibiotics that are either produced by other soil microorganism or introduced anthropogenically. The identification of new antibiotic-inactivating enzymes that can promote resistance against aminoglycosides and β-lactams in both E. coli and P. aeruginosa reinforces the notion that soil is a significant reservoir of as-yet-unknown ARGs that could seriously exacerbate clinical resistance if recruited by human pathogens. Furthermore, the proteomics-driven discovery of a potentially new peptide-mediated resistance mechanism against macrolides underscores the value of deploying high-resolution analytical proteomic technology in functional metagenomics studies.
We demonstrated substrate polyspecificity in a homologous group of ABC efflux systems that can confer resistance against a spectrum of structurally distinct antibiotics and anticancer drugs. These probable two-component transporters all display moderate sequence homology (30 to 50% shared identity) against the DrrAB multidrug efflux system of the DAU-/DOX-producing Streptomyces peucetius (31) and are predicted to originate from bacteria of diverse phyla, including Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria (see Table S3 in the supplemental material). While the identification of novel DrrAB homologues in different bacterial taxa is not unexpected, the ligand promiscuity of these functionally conserved, but sequence-wise diverse, ABC transporters (DrrAB included) raises insightful questions of what drove the development of polyspecific substrate recognition and whether these transporters have shared evolutionary history with similar multidrug efflux system found in now-pathogenic organisms.
The discovery of folPSMZ B27 from the metagenome of soil with no history of exposure to the synthetic sulfonamide antibiotics is intriguing. FolPSMZ B27 is distantly related (∼30% shared sequence identity) to three highly prevalent sulfonamide-resistant DHPS alternatives, Sul1, Sul2, and Sul3 (32), and shows the greatest homology with deduced DHPSs of several uncultured bacteria belonging to the candidate phyla radiation (CPR) group (Fig. 6). CPR organisms are estimated to constitute >15% of the bacterial domain and have relatively small genomes that lack numerous biosynthetic pathways (33). It is therefore tempting to speculate that some bacterial members of this largely uncharacterized phylum might possess alternative folate-biosynthetic mechanisms (e.g., novel DHPS enzyme variants) that are naturally insensitive to the antagonistic effect of sulfonamide. If so, such kinds of underappreciated metabolic pathways might offer biological clues to the ancestry of specific resistance determinants (e.g., FolPSMZ B27 and PBPTET A6), which can act incidentally against artificial antimicrobial agents.
In a genomic context, some of the ARGs are syntenic to elements that indicate lateral gene transfer and acquisition (Table S2). Apart from the most striking case seen with sul2, three unrelated ARGs (pbpTET A6, a metallo-β-lactamases gene, and a transporter gene) were found in close proximity to genes encoding homologues of two bacterial nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) complex components, the Ku and ligase D (LigD) proteins (Table S2). NHEJ carries out DNA double-strand break repair and was discovered first in eukaryotes and subsequently in bacteria (34). The association of ARGs with a putative NHEJ apparatus hints at possible horizontal gene transfer events. Although Ku and LigD are not universal among the bacterial domain, ARG acquisition by similar recombination-independent mechanism has also been reported in E. coli (35). Collectively, these observations suggest that the end-joining DNA repair mechanism might play a role in the spread of environmental ARGs.
While the molecular principles underlying the new macrolide resistance determinants reported have yet to be fully elucidated, the evidence here is consistent with the ribosome being central to these resistance mechanisms. ORF-16TYL 10 has substantial homology to the ribosome-associated GTPase HflX (36). HflX can interact with the peptidyl transferase center (PTC) and nascent peptide exit tunnel (NPET) of the ribosome to induce dissociation of 30S and 50S subunits in a nucleotide-dependent manner, thereby rescuing stalled ribosomes during cellular stress (37). Interestingly, both the NPET-binding macrolides (e.g., erythromycin) and the PTC-binding antibiotics (e.g., chloramphenicol) can inhibit the ribosome-induced GTPase activity of HflX (38). Hence, we hypothesize that ORF-16TYL 10 functions as an alternative ribosome-splitting factor to alleviate the macrolide-mediated translational arrest. We postulate that ORF-16TYL 10 might be able to better “sense” the drug-induced translational stalling event at the PET (and presumably not at the PTC) and/or to withstand the inhibitory effect of macrolides on its ribosome-induced GTPase activity. The dissociation of macrolide-bound ribosome promoted by ORF-16TYL 10 is believed to reset the stalled ribosome to allow productive translation. Concerning the apparent AcrAB dependency of the ORF-16TYL 10-conferred resistance, observations highly similar to ours, in which the macrolide resistance caused by ribosomal mutation was “masked” by drug efflux pump deficiency, have been reported for several bacteria, including E. coli (39). This so-called “drug target mutation masking” effect in response to efflux pump inhibition is fundamentally linked to growth bistability and is favored by factors including high-affinity drug binding to its target and high target abundance within bacterial cells (39), both of which are applicable in the case of macrolide antibiotics and their ribosomal target. As the exact mechanism remains to be unraveled, our data lean toward a conceivable theory of ORF-16TYL 10 acting on the ribosome target, instead of selectively modulating the efflux pump activity, to confer macrolide-specific resistance in an efflux-dependent manner.
An exciting discovery in this study is the macrolide resistance associated with a novel polyproline peptide, PPPAZI 4, which is encoded by an alternative ORF not recalled by the gene prediction algorithm. Together with its exceptionally high proline content, the repeated appearance of diproline motifs in PPPAZI 4 suggests that this small peptide functions in the context of macrolide-induced translational arrest. Sequences containing consecutive proline residues (especially with three or more) can trigger significant stalling of the bacterial ribosome, which is effectively rescued by the translation elongation factor EF-P (40–43). The likelihood of a nascent peptide becoming arrested at its diproline motif is determined by the identity of residues flanking the proline pair (41, 44–46). In contrast to strong stalling sequences (e.g., PPP), PPR and RPP motifs (where R = Arg) confer weak stalling activity, as their translation has little reliance on the activity of EF-P (41, 45). Furthermore, in vivo PPK (where K = Lys) is translationally arrested only when preceded by an acidic residue (44). These findings illustrate the context-specific nature of EF-P-dependent stalling of diproline motifs. Strikingly, PPPAZI 4 consists of 15 (im)perfect PPX motifs in direct tandem arrangement, with Arg (R) and Lys (K) being most frequently found between diproline sequences and no PPP motif present (Fig. 5F). Our preliminary data have shown that PPPAZI 4 can be detected in both an efp deletion mutant (47) and its parental strain carrying plasmid pCL047 and that the macrolide resistance associated with PPPAZI 4 expression is EF-P independent (see Data Set S2 and Table S4 in the supplemental material). Taken together, these results suggest that the sequence of PPPAZI 4 is evolutionarily optimized to ensure its proper synthesis, probably by minimizing the appearance of any strong EF-P-alleviated ribosomal stalling signals, for a reason(s) that could be related to macrolide resistance.
How can the effective translation of PPPAZI 4 be linked to macrolide resistance? We believe our finding is reminiscent of the previously reported peptide-mediated resistance, in which the synthesis of a pentapeptide-encoding ORF renders both Gram-positive (48) and Gram-negative (49) bacteria resistant against erythromycin. Lovmar et al. (50) proposed a cis-acting model implicating a specific interaction between the nascent pentapeptide and the tunnel-bound macrolide, which can lead to erythromycin removal from its ribosomal binding site upon peptidyl-tRNA release at the end of translation cycle. However, PPPAZI 4 is significantly longer than the described pentapeptides. Also, unlike the macrolide selectivity of different resistant pentapeptides, PPPAZI 4 can promote resistance against broad range of macrolides, suggesting an alternative mechanism of action. Notably, PPPAZI 4 shares the first four residues with one of the ketolide-resistant pentapeptides (MSWKI) (51). We speculate that this N terminus sequence facilitates the initial threading of the PPPAZI 4 nascent peptide through the macrolide-obstructed NPET of the ribosome, analogous to how appending the N-terminal sequence of the H-NS protein to the OsmC protein, whose syntheses are erythromycin resistant and erythromycin sensitive, respectively, allowed the latter to evade the macrolide-induced translational attenuation (52). Although the mere presence of a consensus pentapeptide sequence at the N termini of longer peptides did not confer erythromycin resistance (48), PPPAZI 4 comprises a unique multi-PPX segment that has Arg (R) and Lys (K) as the dominant spacer residues and Leu (L) as the major proline substitute in the imperfect PPX motifs. These amino acids are thought to give peptides a high propensity to adopt a distinctive secondary structure called the type II polyproline (PPII) helix (53). In structural terms, the PPII helix is a left-handed helix that is relatively open reading frame and flexible and has no internal hydrogen bonding (54). It is plausible that formation of the PPII helical structure, after the initial threading through of the PPPAZI 4 nascent peptide, can eject the antibiotic, resulting in ribosomal “cleaning” to restore ribosomal translation. This hypothetical model is somewhat analogous to the previously proposed “bottle brush” theory (51), with the exception that PPPAZI 4 can confer cis-acting resistance against general, instead of specific, macrolide members through the complete synthesis of its polyproline segment. The lack of antibiotic resistance in subclone that expressed a truncated version of the PPPAZI 4 gene encoding only the first 25 amino acids (data not shown) is in support of the theory that the multi-PPX sequence is key to the peptide's ability to confer macrolide resistance. Certainly, given that PPII helices are implicated in diverse molecular functions, including cell signaling, transcription, cell motility, and bacterial pathogenesis (54), we cannot exclude the possibility that PPPAZI 4 may possess other biological functions that can render bacteria less susceptible to macrolide antibiotics.
MATERIALS AND METHODS Additional method details are provided in Text S1 in the supplemental material.
Soil treatments and sampling. Soil samples were collected in fall 2014 from two series of antibiotic-amended (and control) field plots established at the Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) experimental farm in London, Canada (18, 19). The drug application history of the three groups of field plots used in the present study, namely, UTC (untreated control), MACRO (macrolides), and SCT (agricultural antibiotics), is presented in Table 1.
Soil DNA extraction and metagenomic clone library construction. High-molecular-weight metagenomic DNA was extracted from 100 g of sieved soil using an indirect extraction method as described by to Liles et al. (55). Pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was used to size fractionate the DNA onto a 1% agarose gel. Nucleic acid with the chosen size of 25 to 70 kb was electroeluted from the excised gel block and concentrated by ethanol precipitation. Three individual metagenomic libraries were constructed using a pCC1FOS fosmid library production kit (Epicentre) with the DNA derived from the aforementioned field plots (UTC, MACRO, and SCT) and the E. coli host strain EPI300-T1R. Fosmid clones from each library were aseptically scraped from the plates, pooled into subpools of ca. 6,000 clones ml−1, and stored at −80°C in LB broth supplemented with 12.5 μg ml−1 chloramphenicol and 15% (vol/vol) glycerol. To estimate the average insert size of each library, fosmid DNA was extracted from 30 randomly selected clones, followed by NotI digestion and PFGE analysis (56).
Selection for antibiotic-resistant metagenomic fosmid clones. Each library was replicated by inoculating scrapes of frozen subpool stocks into 50 ml of LB broth supplemented with 12.5 μg ml−1 chloramphenicol for 2 h at 37°C. Ten- and 100-fold-diluted library cultures were plated separately onto LB agar or Iso-Sensitest agar plates supplemented with one of 12 antibiotics. Colonies formed after the initial 16 to 18 h of incubation at 37°C, together with those, if any, that appeared after further incubation at room temperature for 24 h were subjected to clonality assessment. To preclude any spontaneous mutation of the E. coli host strain that might be (co)selected for during the selection process, fosmid DNA with a unique NotI restriction profile was reelectrotransformed into EPI300-T1R cells to confirm the fosmid-associated antibiotic resistance phenotypes.
Fosmid sequencing and identification of putative ARGs. To resolve the sequence of cloned metagenomic DNA, resistance-associated fosmid targets were sequenced using a MiSeq (multiplex) sequencing system (Illumina). To identify putative antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) harbored on each resistance selected fosmid, transposon mutagenesis was performed using either the EZ-Tn5 <KAN-2> or <TET-1> insertion kit (Epicentre). Transposon-bearing fosmid DNA isolated from mutants with restored susceptibility toward the selection antibiotic was sequenced to locate the transposon insertion site using a transposon-specific primer set.
Subcloning of putative ARGs. The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are summarized in Table 9. For E. coli, selected ORFs (including the predicted promoters) were cloned into pUC19 or pCF430 using PCR-amplified and enzyme-restricted fragments derived from fosmid DNA and introduced into the DH10β strain, unless otherwise specified. The PCR conditions and primer pairs used are provided in Table 10. To construct pCL049, pCL047 was digested with KpnI to remove a 263-bp fragment encompassing the 5′ end of the PPPAZI 4 gene, followed by purification and religation of the remaining DNA fragment. For Pseudomonas aeruginosa, DNA insert fragments were extracted from the pUC19- or pCF430-based constructs by restriction digestion and recloned into the P. aeruginosa-compatible plasmid pUCP19 or pRK415, followed by electrotransforming into the PAO1 strain.
Antibiotic susceptibility assays. The susceptibility of E. coli and P. aeruginosa to antibiotics was assessed using the 2-fold serial microtiter broth dilution method (57) and the MICs recorded after 18 h of incubation at 37°C. To evaluate sulfonamide and anthracycline susceptibility, serial dilutions of overnight cultures were spotted onto Iso-Sensitest agar (for sulfonamides) or LB agar (for anthracyclines) plates supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic, followed by 24 h of incubation at 37°C.
Proteomics analysis. Briefly, E. coli cultures with final optical densities at 600 nm (OD600) of ca. 2 were pelleted, resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and sonicated on ice using a Q125 sonicator (Qsonica). After centrifugation, 100 μg of protein was reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin in the presence of RapiGest surfactant (Waters Corp) The tryptic peptides were resolved using an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system with the Acclaim C18 PepMap column (75 μm by 15 cm) coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans were searched against the target/reverse proteome of E. coli MG1655 (Proteome ID UP0000625, accessed April 2016) with an additional 39 annotated gene products derived from fosmid MACRO-AZI 4. A second search was completed using additional amino acid sequences deduced from all six possible reading frames (including PPPAZI 4) in the subcloned fragment of pCL043.