https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02694-17
Genus-Wide Assessment of Lignocellulose Utilization in the Extremely Thermophilic Genus Caldicellulosiruptor by Genomic, Pangenomic, and Metagenomic Analyses
ABSTRACT Metagenomic data from Obsidian Pool (Yellowstone National Park, USA) and 13 genome sequences were used to reassess genus-wide biodiversity for the extremely thermophilic Caldicellulosiruptor. The updated core genome contains 1,401 ortholog groups (average genome size for 13 species = 2,516 genes). The pangenome, which remains open with a revised total of 3,493 ortholog groups, encodes a variety of multidomain glycoside hydrolases (GHs). These include three cellulases with GH48 domains that are colocated in the glucan degradation locus (GDL) and are specific determinants for microcrystalline cellulose utilization. Three recently sequenced species, Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Rt8.B8 (renamed here Caldicellulosiruptor morganii), Thermoanaerobacter cellulolyticus strain NA10 (renamed here Caldicellulosiruptor naganoensis), and Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Wai35.B1 (renamed here Caldicellulosiruptor danielii), degraded Avicel and lignocellulose (switchgrass). C. morganii was more efficient than Caldicellulosiruptor bescii in this regard and differed from the other 12 species examined, both based on genome content and organization and in the specific domain features of conserved GHs. Metagenomic analysis of lignocellulose-enriched samples from Obsidian Pool revealed limited new information on genus biodiversity. Enrichments yielded genomic signatures closely related to that of Caldicellulosiruptor obsidiansis, but there was also evidence for other thermophilic fermentative anaerobes (Caldanaerobacter, Fervidobacterium, Caloramator, and Clostridium). One enrichment, containing 89.8% Caldicellulosiruptor and 9.7% Caloramator, had a capacity for switchgrass solubilization comparable to that of C. bescii. These results refine the known biodiversity of Caldicellulosiruptor and indicate that microcrystalline cellulose degradation at temperatures above 70°C, based on current information, is limited to certain members of this genus that produce GH48 domain-containing enzymes.
IMPORTANCE The genus Caldicellulosiruptor contains the most thermophilic bacteria capable of lignocellulose deconstruction, which are promising candidates for consolidated bioprocessing for the production of biofuels and bio-based chemicals. The focus here is on the extant capability of this genus for plant biomass degradation and the extent to which this can be inferred from the core and pangenomes, based on analysis of 13 species and metagenomic sequence information from environmental samples. Key to microcrystalline hydrolysis is the content of the glucan degradation locus (GDL), a set of genes encoding glycoside hydrolases (GHs), several of which have GH48 and family 3 carbohydrate binding module domains, that function as primary cellulases. Resolving the relationship between the GDL and lignocellulose degradation will inform efforts to identify more prolific members of the genus and to develop metabolic engineering strategies to improve this characteristic.
INTRODUCTION The extremely thermophilic genus Caldicellulosiruptor consists of Gram-positive, fermentative, anaerobic bacteria that have been isolated from globally diverse, terrestrial, thermal environments (1). In the decade since the first genome of a Caldicellulosiruptor species was sequenced (2), much has been learned about the metabolism and physiology of these microorganisms, and biotechnological applications involving their novel, multidomain glycoside hydrolases (GHs) and fermentative metabolism have been considered (1). While all known species in the genus can grow on complex polysaccharides found in plant biomass, only a subset can extensively deconstruct microcrystalline cellulose (3). The key determinant for this phenotype appears to be the presence of GH48 domains encoded in the genome in the so-called glucan degradation locus (GDL) (4). For instance, in some species, this locus encodes a modular cellulase (termed CelA) that is unique to the genus Caldicellulosiruptor. CelA is composed of GH9 and GH48 domains surrounding a core of family 3 carbohydrate binding modules (CBM3s) that enable the enzyme to burrow into crystalline cellulose as part of its hydrolytic mechanism (5, 6). In addition to degradation of cellulose and hemicellulose, Caldicellulosiruptor species can attach to crystalline cellulose and plant biomass, a process by which substrate binding proteins (7), S-layer-located proteins (8, 9), and structurally unique binding proteins called tāpirins (10) have been implicated. Tāpirins are 70- to 100-kDa proteins associated with the cell envelope and implicated in mediating attachment with binding affinities comparable to those of CBM3 domains. Thus far, Caldicellulosiruptor bescii is the only species in the genus that has been shown to have a tractable genetic system, and it has been successfully used to study and improve the features of this bacterium (8, 11–15). Recently, a kanamycin antibiotic selection marker was developed that significantly improves the ability for genetic manipulation of C. bescii (16) and facilitated development of genetically stable strains for metabolic engineering (17).
Previously, the complete genome sequences of eight Caldicellulosiruptor species and their physiological characteristics were used to assess the capacity within the genus for lignocellulose deconstruction (4). Recently, genome sequences of three additional Caldicellulosiruptor species were reported: Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Rt8.B8 (herein renamed Caldicellulosiruptor morganii), Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Wai35.B1 (herein renamed Caldicellulosiruptor danielii), and “Thermoanaerobacter cellulolyticus” strain NA10 (herein renamed Caldicellulosiruptor naganoensis) (18). C. morganii and C. danielii were isolated in Rotorua and Waimangu, New Zealand, respectively, while C. naganoensis was isolated from Nagano Prefecture in Japan (19) (Fig. 1). The sequences of these organisms, along with the genome sequences of Caldicellulosiruptor acetigenus (20) and Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain F32 (21), were used in this study to reevaluate the Caldicellulosiruptor core genome and pangenome to further assess biodiversity within the genus and among other extremely thermophilic bacteria (22). After analysis of eight genomes, the Caldicellulosiruptor pangenome remained open (4), suggesting that there are still unidentified genes and pathways that could be important for lignocellulosic degradation by these bacteria and be useful for guiding metabolic engineering strategies for the production of bio-based fuels and chemicals. In this investigation, we updated the pangenome by analyzing recently sequenced Caldicellulosiruptor species. We also include metagenomic data from geothermal hot spring enrichments in Yellowstone National Park (YNP), USA. Furthermore, to provide additional perspective on microbial lignocellulose degradation at elevated temperatures, genomes of Caldicellulosiruptor species were compared to those from the genus Thermotoga (23), which contains bacteria with similar optimal growth temperatures (Topts) that are also capable of growth on complex polysaccharides but are unable to utilize microcrystalline cellulose.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Reassessment of biodiversity in the genus Caldicellulosiruptor. Since the last comprehensive analysis of the genus (4), five more species isolated from different locations worldwide have had their genomes sequenced (18, 20, 21, 24, 25) (Fig. 1). Although the 16S rRNA sequence is available for another species, Caldicellulosiruptor changbaiensis, its genome sequence has not been reported (24). As a result, both the core genome and pangenome (Fig. 2) could be updated to include C. acetigenus (20), Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain F32 (21), C. danielii, C. morganii, and C. naganoensis (18). The average number of identifiable genes in the 13 available genomes is 2,516, with a range of 2,331 to 2,776 genes. The reevaluated Caldicellulosiruptor core genome corresponds to 1,401 orthologous groups, compared to the previous estimate of 1,580 based on eight genomes (4). Furthermore, the 13 currently available Caldicellulosiruptor genomes contribute to a pangenome of 3,493 orthologous groups, which appears to remain open (Fig. 2). High levels of diversity resulting from genome plasticity likely contribute to the pangenome, even as additional species are identified and metagenomic samples become available from Caldicellulosiruptor biotopes.
Previously, 16S rRNA phylogeny and whole-genome average nucleotide identity (ANI) indicated a correlation between geographical location of strain isolation and the genome sequence of the strain (4). With the addition of five new genomes, this correlation still holds true for certain geographical locations; for example, the Caldicellulosiruptor isolates from North America, Iceland, and Russia have highly similar genomes (Fig. 1; see also Table S1 in the supplemental material). Caldicellulosiruptor hydrothermalis, a Russian isolate, is an exception, since it is also closely related to the Icelandic species. Based on ANI, C. hydrothermalis is 91.19% and 91.07% identical to two Russian isolates, C. bescii and Caldicellulosiruptor kronotskyensis, respectively, but also 91.13%, 90.66%, and 91.10% identical to the Icelandic species C. acetigenus, Caldicellulosiruptor kristjanssonii, and Caldicellulosiruptor lactoaceticus, respectively. However, for the other Asian and New Zealand isolates, the connection between genome sequence and isolation site is not as evident. In fact, all three New Zealand species have the strongest ANI relationship to isolates from other geographic locales. For example, Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus is closest to Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain F32 from China and C. naganoensis from Japan. Furthermore, of the currently available isolates, the most divergent is C. morganii, which by ANI (82.91% identity) is most closely related to C. naganoensis.
Of primary interest here is the capacity of Caldicellulosiruptor species to degrade microcrystalline cellulose. Based on genome sequence analysis, it is possible to examine this characteristic in a predictive way. The number of annotated glycoside hydrolases (GHs) in the genome varies from 37 in C. kristjanssonii to 77 in C. kronotskyensis (Fig. 1), although this total does not necessarily correlate with cellulolytic activity. The Caldicellulosiruptor genus can be divided into weakly cellulolytic (C. acetigenus, C. hydrothermalis, C. kristjanssonii, C. lactoaceticus, C. owensensis, and Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain F32) and moderately to highly cellulolytic (C. bescii, C. kronotskyensis, C. morganii, C. danielii, C. naganoensis, C. saccharolyticus, and C. obsidiansis) species; the latter grouping includes all species containing the well-studied CelA cellulase, already shown to be important for cellulose utilization (5, 6, 26). Pfam domains most prevalent in either group were examined, but there were no significant differences between the two clusters. This is not surprising, as lignocellulose degradation is a complex trait. The weakly cellulolytic species generally have more phage, methyltransferase, and flagellar Pfam domains, plus domains of unknown function, while the moderately to strongly cellulolytic species have more type II/IV pili, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR), and ATPase Pfam domains. The genomes of highly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor species do contain more glycosyltransferases, carbohydrate binding modules, and GHs. Furthermore, genome sequences for the weakly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor species encode GHs capable of glucan, xylan, and mannan hydrolysis but lack enzymes containing cellulose-degrading GH48 domains; C. bescii, C. kronotskyensis, and the newly sequenced species, C. danielii, C. morganii, and C. naganoensis, all contain three GH48 domains and are all prolific cellulose degraders, as discussed below. The five most strongly cellulolytic species also have the highest numbers of CBM3s, with 22, 38, 16, 20, and 14 for C. bescii, C. naganoensis, C. kronotskyensis, C. morganii, and C. danielii, respectively; in contrast, C. lactoaceticus has 16 CBM3 domains and is weakly to moderately cellulolytic (only one GH48 domain) (4).
Microcrystalline cellulose and plant biomass degradation by Caldicellulosiruptor species and YNP hot spring microbial communities.
The cellulolytic capacities of characterized Caldicellulosiruptor species vary significantly (27), even among isolates originating from the same geographical area (4, 10). To examine this issue further, the capacity to degrade cellulose was determined for the three recently sequenced Caldicellulosiruptor species (C. danielii, C. morganii, and C. naganoensis) as well as for microbial enrichments obtained from Obsidian Pool, Yellowstone National Park (YNP). Cultures growing on cellobiose were examined to detect any major physiological differences, while growth on microcrystalline cellulose (Avicel) or switchgrass was used to assess potential phenotypic differences related to carbohydrate-active enzyme (CAZyme) inventories in these species. Overall, C. danielii, C. morganii, and C. naganoensis all grew similarly on cellobiose (Fig. 3A), Avicel (Fig. 3B), and switchgrass (Fig. 3C) with few exceptions, comparable to growth on these substrates by C. bescii, confirming that these isolates likely belong to the highly cellulolytic group of Caldicellulosiruptor species. Compared to the other species, C. danielii grew more rapidly than other species during early exponential phase on switchgrass only, perhaps a result of more efficient initial degradation of the hemicellulose fraction. However, cell counts only included the planktonic population, precluding potentially significant contributions from attached cells. Substrate solubilization, as measured by mass loss, was used to determine the composite degradative abilities of the cultures. C. danielii and C. naganoensis solubilized approximately 80% of the cellulose (Avicel), again comparable to C. bescii, while C. morganii solubilized 92% of the Avicel (Fig. 3D). On switchgrass, C. naganoensis performed similarly to C. bescii (26%), while C. danielii solubilized slightly less switchgrass (22%) and C. morganii slightly more switchgrass (30%) than C. bescii (Fig. 3E).
To further examine lignocellulose degradation by terrestrial hot spring microorganisms, samples were taken from multiple sites, ranging from 68 to 75°C and pH 6 to 6.5, within Obsidian Pool at YNP. These environmental cultures were enriched on cellulose and tested for the ability to solubilize switchgrass (Fig. 3F). Four separate communities (B6, B7, B9, and AVI) were compared to C. bescii (3 GH48 and 16 CBM3 domains) and to an isolate native to YNP, Caldicellulosiruptor obsidiansis (2 GH48 and 10 CBM3 domains). C. obsidiansis solubilized 13% of the switchgrass, which was less than the amount solubilized by C. bescii (25%). Three of the four enrichments (B6, B7, and B9) also solubilized less switchgrass than C. bescii, but the other community (AVI) was superior, at 31%. These differential capacities to solubilize switchgrass are likely the result of variable community compositions in the environments, while differences in GDL cellulases impacted the relative extents of solubilization by C. bescii and C. obsidiansis.
Biodiversity of extremely thermophilic, cellulolytic Obsidian Pool, YNP, microbial communities determined by metagenomic sequencing.
Obsidian Pool, the native habitat of the moderately cellulolytic C. obsidiansis, had previously been investigated for general diversity of cellulolytic microbes, and a 16S rRNA analysis revealed that at temperatures above 65°C, Caldicellulosiruptor species dominate the microbiome (28). To identify Caldicellulosiruptor or other cellulolytic species in various locations of the pool, environmental samples were enriched on cellulose. 16S rRNA gene and metagenomic analyses of the enrichment communities confirmed the limited biodiversity of microorganisms involved in cellulose hydrolysis at high temperatures (>70°C). In total, there were only 7 to 9 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) identified in each enriched community, which appeared to be primarily cocultures of a dominant Caldicellulosiruptor species and a representative from one other genus (Table 1). Community B9 was the exception; based on 16S rRNA sequencing, a Caldanaerobacter species was the main member, at 61%, with a Caldicellulosiruptor species as the other component. Other genera identified, aside from Caldicellulosiruptor, were Fervidobacterium (approximately 16% and 0.1% for B6 and B7, respectively) and Caloramator (approximately 10% for AVI). The extent to which the non-Caldicellulosiruptor species impacted switchgrass solubilization is unclear; for AVI, which exhibited the highest level of cellulose degradation, Caloramator species are reported to grow optimally at around 60°C (29), suggesting that their contribution would be minimal.
From each of the metagenomic sequence data sets, large scaffolds (ranging from 2 to 3 Mb) were completely assembled and appeared to represent single species genomes. Based on BLAST comparisons, each of these scaffolds has been associated with a particular species, and they corresponded closely with the 16S rRNA gene analysis. For instance, a 2-Mb contig from B6 was found to be 90% similar to Fervidobacterium pennivorans (Topt = 70°C [30]), a species whose genus makes up the second largest portion of the B6 microbial community but is not known to be cellulolytic. Likewise, the B7 community was 99.9% Caldicellulosiruptor by 16S rRNA diversity estimates, and that also holds true for the genome assembly; the sequencing fragments all formed a single scaffold, which is 99% similar to the genome of C. obsidiansis. When considering multiple conserved ribosomal genes from each metagenomic community, the phylogenetic relationship between the different species present in B6, B7, B9, and AVI becomes clearer (Fig. 4). Any Caldicellulosiruptor species from the metagenomes pair quite closely with C. obsidiansis in the tree, while non-Caldicellulosiruptor sequences align as expected with the species matching the full-length scaffold BLAST comparisons.
Structure and composition of the GDL in Caldicellulosiruptor isolates and communities. A key genomic region in Caldicellulosiruptor species, the glucan degradation locus (GDL), encodes up to approximately 50 kb of sequence (in C. bescii) and contains the core secretome-bound CAZymes required for microcrystalline cellulose hydrolysis (Fig. 5). This region in the newly sequenced cellulolytic species (C. danielii, C. morganii, and C. naganoensis) was compared to those in the other genome-sequenced Caldicellulosiruptor species (Fig. 6). A phylogenetic tree from concatenated GDL nucleotide sequences identified both large and subtle differences among isolates and the YNP environmental communities. Similar to the geography-genome correlation (ANI and phylogenetic tree) that Caldicellulosiruptor species share with one another, the GDLs from similar locations mostly cluster together (Fig. 5). However, the New Zealand isolates are fairly divergent from one another. The GDL from C. morganii clusters with the Icelandic isolates, while C. naganoensis (Japan) and C. danielii (New Zealand) cluster with C. saccharolyticus (New Zealand) and Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain F32 (China). As expected, the GDL from YNP environmental communities clusters most closely with C. obsidiansis, the YNP isolate. There are, however, some important differences between C. obsidiansis and the YNP metagenomes, in particular the presence of a GH10-CBM3-CBM3-GH48 enzyme in C. bescii and in some YNP communities which is missing in C. obsidiansis (Fig. 5). Other subtle differences between the GDL for C. obsidiansis, B6, B7, B9, and AVI became apparent based on branching within the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 6). For example, B6 appears to be the most similar, but not identical on a nucleotide level, to the GDL from C. obsidiansis. Although the GDL composition is predictive of a cellulolytic phenotype in terrestrial hot spring isolates and communities, there appears to be selection of GH and combinations such that even stronger cellulolytic phenotypes might be identified.
Encoded within the GDL, the enzyme CelA, composed of GH9-CBM3-CBM3-CBM3-GH48 domains, is a highly conserved indicator of a cellulolytic phenotype (4, 5). However, it is not the only enzyme with a GH48 domain in cellulose-degrading Caldicellulosiruptor species (Fig. 5) (3, 4, 27). Both C. bescii and C. kronotskyensis have two additional GH48 domains in the GDL, previously the most identified to date in Caldicellulosiruptor species. Compared to one another, species with fewer GH48 domains in the GDL do not perform as well on cellulosic substrates (4, 27). C. danielii, C. morganii, and C. naganoensis all contain three GH48 domains, consistent with their strong cellulolytic capacity, based on both Avicel and switchgrass hydrolysis. C. morganii, the most divergent species identified thus far, has an additional CBM3 domain in between the two catalytic modules. In fact, the C. morganii GDL locus contains an additional CBM3 in multiple GDL enzymes. Whether or not these additional binding modules directly improve lignocellulose degradation is unclear, but it is worth noting that C. morganii solubilized more crystalline cellulose and switchgrass than the other Caldicellulosiruptor species (Fig. 3D and E). It is interesting that the GDL (Fig. 6) from the strongly cellulolytic C. morganii clusters with the moderately to weakly cellulolytic species (C. lactoaceticus and C. kristjanssonii). However, these Icelandic species lack the GH48 domain in their CelA homologs (GH9-CBM3-CBM3), as well as other GH48-containing enzymes in the GDL, consistent with their relatively lower capacity for cellulose hydrolysis (Fig. 5). Thus, it seems that the presence of GH48 domains, and not necessarily their genomic location or molecular organization, is a primary determinant of a strong cellulolytic phenotype.
Metagenomic sequences from the YNP communities further support the importance of GH48 domains in cellulose hydrolysis. AVI exhibited higher switchgrass solubilization levels in comparison to C. bescii (three GH48s) and the isolate native to YNP, C. obsidiansis (two GH48s). It is not surprising, then, that analysis of the metagenomic sequence for community AVI indicated that it possesses at minimum three different modular enzymes with GH48 domains (located in three different contigs with a total of 5 occurrences), all of which belong to Caldicellulosiruptor species based on amino acid sequence identity. Additionally, the exact genomic arrangement of three GDL enzymes in one AVI contig (GH9-CBM3-CBM3-CBM3-GH48, GH10-CBM3-CBM3-GH48, and GH10-CBM3-CBM3-GH5 shown in Fig. 5) has not been described previously for a Caldicellulosiruptor species. The other three YNP metagenomes contained fewer GH48 domain-containing modular enzymes in different contigs than AVI (B6, 2; B7, 4; and B9, 3), and this corresponded to various levels of lower switchgrass solubilization than AVI. Levels of switchgrass solubilization also match with the relative estimates of community structure based on 16S rRNA sequences, with communities AVI and B7 having the largest relative levels of Caldicellulosiruptor isolates, followed by B6 and then B9 (Table 1). Thus, both community structure and the presence of additional Caldicellulosiruptor GH48 domains in community AVI correlate to the higher solubilization of switchgrass than in the other communities. While contributions to lignocellulose hydrolysis could be related to the presence of the Caloramator species in AVI, genomic analysis showed that no GH48 or CBM3 domains are present in available genomes for these bacteria (31), nor were any identified in the metagenome. Instead, it is likely that there is synergism among the multiple Caldicellulosiruptor species/strains; the GDL loci identified in AVI support this strong cellulolytic phenotype.
GH48 domains are not the only determinant in the strongly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor species, as the GDL in fact contains other GHs with cellulolytic activity. Recently, synergy between specific non-CelA CAZymes in the GDL was found to be important, specifically those enzymes with GH10/GH48 and GH5/GH44 domains (26). The five highly cellulolytic species (C. bescii, C. kronotskyensis, C. morganii, C. danielii, and C. naganoensis) are the only Caldicellulosiruptor species studied so far to contain enzymes with GH10/GH48 and GH5/GH44 domains, with the exception of C. morganii, which has GH9/GH44 and GH74/GH44 pairings. While the less cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor GDLs do contain GH5, GH10, and/or GH44 domains, they are not organized in the same way as with the highly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor. Since the absence of these enzymes in C. bescii knockouts substantially reduced cellulose degradation (26), homologs are probably equally important in the other four strongly cellulolytic species.
Analysis of Caldicellulosiruptor genomes and metagenomes shows that the GDL organization is conserved, aside from some differences observed in C. morganii (Fig. 5). However, in the three newly sequenced species, a novel GH12 domain can be identified in GH48-containing enzymes: GH10-CBM3-CBM3-GH12-GH48 (C. naganoensis), GH10-CBM3-GH12-GH48 (C. danielii), and GH12-GH5-CBM3-CBM3-CBM3-GH48 (C. morganii). The GH12 domains from C. naganoensis and C. danielii are 99% identical to each other and 70% identical to the GH12 from C. morganii. Outside of the Caldicellulosiruptor genus, these GH12 domains are 51% (C. naganoensis), 49% (C. danielii), and 47% (C. morganii) similar to GH12 domains in Bacillus licheniformis, Actinoplanes rectilineatus, and Actinoplanes missouriensis, respectively. GH12 domains occur in endoglucanses, xyloglucan hydrolases, β-1,3-1,4-glucanases, and xyloglucan endotransglycosylases (32), but their role in these Caldicellulosiruptor enzymes had yet to be determined.
To assess the ability of the GH12-containing enzymes to degrade cellulose, recombinant Wai35_2053 (GH10-CBM3-GH12-GH48), the version from C. danielii, was produced in C. bescii and compared to recombinant CelA (GH9-CBM3-CBM3-CBM3-GH48) from C. bescii for Avicel hydrolysis (Fig. 7). At 70°C, CelA had hydrolyzed about twice as much Avicel as Wai35_2053 after 168 h, but at 80°C this difference was only 1.6-fold. In fact, unlike CelA, Wai35_2053 function was only minimally affected by temperature between 70 and 80°C. More importantly, unlike CelA, Wai35_2053 also contains domains that would enable it to hydrolyze xylans (GH10) and xyloglucans (GH12), thus making it biocatalytically more versatile; this could broaden the feedstocks utilized by Caldicellulosiruptor species with GH12-containing cellulases. Future work will examine the impact of inserting the gene encoding Wai35_2053 into C. bescii, along the lines of our previous efforts with inserting Calkro_0402 into C. bescii (8).
Biological microcrystalline hydrolysis at temperatures above 70°C. The expanded information on the genus Caldicellulosiruptor raises questions on how the capacity for microcrystalline cellulose utilization was acquired or evolved in Caldicellulosiruptor species, and if more than the presence of one or more GH48/CBM3 domain-containing enzymes in the GDL was involved. Microbial degradation of microcrystalline cellulose is a somewhat rare natural phenomenon and is not observed above 70°C to any significant extent beyond the genus Caldicellulosiruptor, mainly because primary cellulases (can hydrolyze microcrystalline cellulose) have not yet been identified that function at such elevated temperatures. β-Glucanases with high temperature optima have been described (e.g., in reference 33), but these enzymes are typically not primary cellulases and hydrolyze only soluble and amorphous forms of cellulose or amorphous regions of crystalline cellulose (34). An archaeal consortium was identified as growing on filter paper at 90°C from which a multidomain enzyme containing a GH5 domain, homologous to a putative GH5 enzyme encoded in Caldicellulosiruptor species (e.g., Csac_2528), was described (35). However, the metagenome for the consortium did not contain any GH48 or CBM3 domains and extensive filter paper dissolution occurred only after a protracted period (65 days) at 90°C, compared to hours at 70°C for cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor species (3).
Among extremely thermophilic bacteria (Topt ≥ 70°C), the growth physiology of members of the genus Thermotoga resembles that of the Caldicellulosiruptor in that they grow on soluble β-glucans, such as carboxymethyl cellulose and barley glucan, and hemicelluloses, such as xylan and mannan. However, Thermotoga species do not grow to any extent on microcrystalline cellulose (23), and their genomes do not encode GH48 or CBM3 domains. For many Thermotoga species, this is consistent with the lack of plant biomass in their natural biotopes, i.e., marine environments, although Thermotoga species from terrestrial geothermal biotopes have been reported (36, 37), and likely cohabit hot springs harboring Caldicellulosiruptor species (e.g., Thermotoga Toll_T1-r01 [38]). However, as shown in Fig. 1 and 8, comparative genomics indicate that the genera Thermotoga and Caldicellulosiruptor are not closely related, nor are species in either genus related to the moderately thermophilic cellulose degrader Clostridium thermocellum (39). A cross-Thermotoga-Caldicellulosiruptor core genome, based on the available sequence information, contains only 444 ortholog groups (many of which are proteins involved in central metabolism and transcription/translation), compared to 1,401 for Caldicellulosiruptor (average genome size of 2,516 genes) and 687 for Thermotoga (average genome size of 1,950 genes). The genus Thermotoga was recently proposed to be separated into two genera, with the amended genus retaining the original name and a second genus formed named Pseudothermotoga (40). This partitioning of Thermotoga species was also identified in this study by highlighting patterns in the prevalence of Pfam domains in Thermotoga and Caldicellulosiruptor species (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material) and via the cross-genus pangenome analysis (Fig. 8). The second Thermotoga group differentiates from the original genus when more prevalent Pfam domains mapping to glycoside hydrolases are considered and is missing some core Thermotoga genes (Fig. 8B and C), while sharing a few Caldicellulosiruptor gene homologs (as shown in Fig. 8D). However, even with this additional detail, no direct evidence of an evolutionary relationship between Caldicellulosiruptor and Thermotoga is evident. Since the only factor preventing Thermotoga species from degrading microcrystalline cellulose could be the lack of GH48-CBM3 cellulases, CelA and CelB both from the GDL encoded in the C. saccharolyticus genome were engineered into Thermotoga sp. strain RQ2, although the resulting mutant was not genetically stable (41).
Thus, it is not clear how certain Caldicellulosiruptor species acquired their novel multidomain cellulases, nor has the driving force for cellulose degradation in geothermal environments been identified. While it is always possible that new discoveries will bring to light other high-temperature enzymes and microorganisms that attack crystalline cellulose, biotopes potentially harboring such systems have already been examined in some detail. However, this pairwise comparison of these two extremely thermophilic genera has shown that the presence or absence of key GHs and CBMs are the major differentiating factor for cellulose utilization. Specifically, at least one GH48 enzyme encoded in the GDL seems to be essential for this property, and three GH48 domains correlate with a strong cellulolytic phenotype. Further improvements in microcrystalline cellulose hydrolysis may be forthcoming through metabolic engineering or through GH48 domains with enhanced activity. Nonetheless, we are getting a better understanding of what to look for when screening neutral, terrestrial hot springs for cellulose degraders, at least until better candidates are identified that utilize cellulose via a different paradigm.
Reclassification and renaming of the newly sequenced Caldicellulosiruptor species. All three bacterial strains, Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Wai35.B1, Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Rt8.B8, and “Thermoanaerobacter cellulolyticus” strain NA10, were previously characterized on the basis of phenotype, including sugar metabolism, fermentation products, and optimal growth temperatures (19, 42) Here we provide complementary genomic data that further support the designation of all three strains as individual species. In all three cases, the phylogenetic tree assembled from concatenated ribosomal gene sequences (Fig. 4, following methods in reference 43) demonstrates that all three species in question cluster with the genus Caldicellulosiruptor. Divergence in concatenated ribosomal gene sequences (indicated by branch length) supports the designation of C. danielli, C. morganii, and C. naganoensis as separate species, given that their nucleotide substitutions are greater than that observed between the species: C. acetigenus, C. kristjanssonii, and C. lactoaceticus. In one case, that of C. naganoensis, ANI comparisons from genome sequence data (∼79 to 89% ANI [Table S1]) indicate that this strain should be reassigned to the genus Caldicellulosiruptor. In the other two cases, we propose here to assign species names to isolates provisionally named some time ago. Their ANI values support the species designation of C. danielii and C. morganii based on genotype. Finally, we provide information here that allows for their separate identification based on unique genes and genome organization (Table 2). These three isolates belong to the highly cellulolytic group of this genus (now numbering 5 out of the 13 genome-sequenced species), which correlated with their complete GDL enzyme set, including several GH48 domains.
Comparative genome sequence analysis supports renaming “Thermoanaerobacter cellulolyticus” strain NA10T (DSM 8991) to indicate that this species is a member of the genus Caldicellulosiruptor, and hence, we propose reclassification as Caldicellulosiruptor naganoensis sp. nov. (na.ga.no.en′sis. N.L. masc. adj. naganoensis referring to the isolation of NA10 from Nagano Prefecture, Japan). Furthermore, we propose renaming Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Wai35.B1T (DSM 8977) as Caldicellulosiruptor danielii sp. nov. (dan.iel′i.i. N.L. gen masc. n. named for Roy Daniel) and renaming Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Rt8.B8T (DSM 8990) as Caldicellulosiruptor morganii sp. nov. (mor.gan.i.i′ N.L. gen masc. n. named for Hugh Morgan), for the investigators' pioneering work on the isolation of Caldicellulosiruptor species while at the University of Waikato in New Zealand. To assist in the differentiation of these isolates, Table 2 lists distinguishing features of each species, including non-Caldicellulosiruptor genes specific to C. danielii, C. morganii, or C. naganoensis. These unique species gene markers were identified in the genus pangenomic analysis and represent a simple genomic method to clearly screen for these organisms among other Caldicellulosiruptor species.
MATERIALS AND METHODS Growth of microorganisms. C. obsidiansis was obtained as a gift from the J. G. Elkins Lab at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, while C. bescii (44), Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Rt8.B8 (42), Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Wai35.B1 (42), and “Thermoanaerobacter cellulolyticus” strain NA10 (19) were obtained from the Leibniz Institute DSMZ (German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures). Each species was established in liquid culture from freezer stocks and grown at 70°C on modified 671 DSMZ medium (671d) with 1 g/liter of cellobiose as the carbon source. Before assessment of biosolubilization capacity or determination of specific growth rates, species were passaged three times on microcrystalline cellulose (Avicel) or switchgrass (5 g/liter) as the sole carbon source in 671d medium. Cultures were inoculated at a concentration of 1 × 106 cells/ml in 50 ml of 671d medium with 5 g/liter of cellobiose, Avicel, or switchgrass and grown at 70°C in oil baths with shaking at 100 rpm. Cells were enumerated with epifluorescence microscopy using acridine orange, as described previously (45), using three biological replicates to calculate doubling times and their respective standard deviations; one growth curve for each species/substrate is shown to illustrate growth physiology.
Metagenomics sampling. Four environmental cultures (B6, B7, B9, and AVI) were isolated from Obsidian Pool, Yellowstone National Park, USA, at points nearby plant material within the hot spring for which temperature and pH were recorded. All samples were collected in 250-ml Pyrex bottles with 43-mm openings and sealed with straight-plug butyl rubber stoppers. Resazurin (∼1 μg/ml) and sodium sulfide (∼0.05%, wt/vol, from a 10% stock at pH 8.0) were added to each sample. Cultures B6, B7, and B9 were directly sampled from the pool (no substrate added), while AVI was enriched onsite by adding Avicel and yeast extract (∼0.1% each) to 150 to 250 ml of collected hot spring liquid and incubating cultures in the pool at ∼70°C for 25 h. All cultures were transported at ambient temperature to the Hyperthermophile Laboratory at North Carolina State University and then stored at 4°C. Once in the lab, cultures were grown on filter paper in 640 DSM medium at 70°C until turbid and then passaged once more until filter paper shredding was recorded.
Biosolubilization of microcrystalline cellulose and switchgrass. BioEnergy Science Center (BESC) standard switchgrass was ground and sieved to an 80/20 mesh particle size before being washed with deionized water at room temperature and dried at 70°C. The solubilization test was performed in bottled batch cultures with 5 g/liter of dried Avicel or switchgrass in 100 ml of 671d medium. Each substrate was incubated and dried individually at 70°C overnight prior to addition to the medium. Bottles were inoculated at 1 × 106 cells/ml and incubated for 7 days at 70°C in oil baths with shaking at 100 rpm; abiotic controls were also simultaneously incubated, and all samples were treated in triplicate. After 7 days, the substrates were washed at 70°C with two culture volumes of Picopure water; residual switchgrass was recovered by filtration in coarse-porosity (40- to 60-μm) glass filter crucibles, while residual Avicel was separated by centrifugation at 6,000 × g for 10 min. Substrates were then dried overnight at 70°C either in the filter crucibles (for switchgrass) or in aluminum weigh boats (for Avicel). The amount of substrate solubilized was calculated by comparing the initial and final washed masses of the switchgrass or Avicel remaining following incubation in the particular bacterial culture. Error was calculated from the standard deviation of the triplicate solubilization of each species/substrate.
Metagenome sequencing. Filter paper-enriched B6, B7, B9, and AVI environmental samples were revived in 50-ml cultures of 640 DSM media with 5 g/liter Avicel and then scaled up to 500-ml cultures. Genomic DNA was isolated from these samples using a phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol extraction method as described previously (4). The assembled metagenome DNA sequences were constructed by generating 10-kb PacBio libraries of >10 kb using AMPUre bead size selection. These libraries were then sequenced on PacBio RS with 120-min movies and P4/C2 chemistry. The Hierarchical Genome Assembly Process (HGAP) (46), BLASR (47), and BB tools (https://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/) were used for assembly and annotation. Metagenome sequencing was done at the DOE Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA.
For 16S rRNA characterization, plate-based 16S-V4 region iTag prep was performed with a 30-ng genomic DNA (gDNA) sample input using custom-designed target primers (515F/806R) with incorporated Illumina sequencing adapters and the 5 PRIME HotMasterMix amplification kit with 30 cycles of PCR. After library sample preparation, the samples were pooled and the pool was quantified using KAPA Biosystem's next-generation sequencing library quantitative PCR (qPCR) kit and run on a Roche LightCycler 480 real-time PCR instrument. The pool was then loaded and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq sequencing platform utilizing a MiSeq reagent kit, v2 (500 cycle), following a 2 × 250 indexed run recipe.
Phylogenetic analyses of Caldicellulosiruptor and Thermotoga species. JSpeciesWS (http://jspecies.ribohost.com/jspeciesws/) was used to generate average nucleotide identity (ANI) comparisons as percent values of all fully sequenced Caldicellulosiruptor species utilizing the ANIb algorithm (48), which were then imaged as a heat plot. To identify orthologous groups of proteins, all-against-all BLASTP comparisons were performed for genomes of all 13 Caldicellulosiruptor isolates. Based on best reciprocal sequence similarity, the putative orthologous relationships between proteome pairs were determined with OrthoMCL (49). Based on empirical evidence, a P value cutoff of 1e−5 was applied for putative orthologs. Based on the homology profiles of the entire proteomes of each species, proteins that were found to have no significant homology with other species were considered to be unique. The count of the number of proteins in each homologous group was subsequently binarized for each isolate, and the results were graphed as a heat map.
The results from OrthoMCL clustering were used to examine the core genome and pangenome for the 13 Caldicellulosiruptor species. All species' genomic DNA sequences were downloaded from the DOE Joint Genome Institute Integrated Microbial Genomes (IMG) database, and all genomes are closed with the exception of those of Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain F32, Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Rt8.B8 (C. morganii), Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Wai25.B1 (C. danielii), and Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain NA10 (in IMG listed as “Thermoanaerobacter cellulolyticus NA10” and reclassified here as C. naganoensis); F32, C. morganii, C. danielii, and C. naganoensis genomes are present in 127, 2, 1, and 12 scaffolds, respectively (Table S3) (18). The genomes were initially sorted descending by total homologous protein count, and subsequently the core and pan sets were determined. The core gene cluster between two species was defined as homologous genes (ortholog groups) present in both species and containing at least one gene member for each species. The same approach was used to include the remaining set of species, including those from the genus Thermotoga. Consequently, the pan set of gene clusters for two species was defined as the total set of ortholog groups for those two species, and the same approach was used to calculate the pangenome model for all remaining species.
t-SNE affinity analysis with Fisher exact enrichment. t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) is a technique developed by Van Der Maaten and Hinton (50) and used to visualize high-dimensional data by means of dimensional reduction. This technique was used to embed the species by Pfam domain matrix into a lower two-dimensional scatter plot. The points in the scatter plot are species, with the plot revealing structure associated with their functional potential. Affinity propagation clustering (51) was then used to cluster the points. Each cluster represents a group of species that have some putative functional association. Fisher's exact test was applied to determine the Pfam domains that were enriched for this clustering, after correction for multiple-hypotheses bias (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.01). The results were then visualized in a network showing significantly association of Pfam domains with a cluster, along with the species that comprise the cluster.
Evolutionary analysis of the genus Caldicellulosiruptor using conserved genes. A rooted concatenated gene alignment was built from ribosomal protein gene sequences, similar to the process described in reference 43; however, two ribosomal protein gene sets (L15 and L18) were not used due to truncated metagenome contigs. A total of 14 ribosomal gene sets (ribosomal proteins L2, L3, L4, l5, L6, L14, L16, L22, L24, S3, S8, S10, S17, and S19) were retrieved for 13 Caldicellulosiruptor isolates, 9 metagenome contigs and 5 outgroup species from IMG/M (38). Outgroups for this tree were selected based on homology of non-Caldicellulosiruptor contigs and included an extremely thermophilic heterotroph also isolated from Obsidian Pool, Yellowstone National Park. Each set of ribosomal protein genes were aligned with Muscle (52), saved as FASTA alignments, and concatenated using SequenceMatrix (53). Concatenated alignments for all 27 species were used to build the maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree in MEGA7 using the Tamura-Nei model, and 500 bootstraps (54). The phylogenetic tree was imported into Inkscape (http://inkscape.org) to edit the font color and formatting and to replace percentage numbers with circles as representations of bootstrap confidence levels.
Genomic analysis of carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) and GDL in Caldicellulosiruptor isolates and metagenomic sequences.
An unrooted phylogenetic tree was built using the MEGA7 software package (54) with concatenated nucleotide sequences from the glucan degradation locus (GDL). Briefly, each gene encoding an enzyme with a minimum of one homolog were aligned using ClustalW (55) and saved as an aligned FASTA file. Each alignment file was imported into SequenceMatrix (53) for concatenation and exported as a naked Nexus file. MEGA7 was then used again to convert the Nexus file to MEGA format and build a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree using the Tamura-Nei model and 500 bootstraps.
Carbohydrate-active enzymes were identified in the Caldicellulosiruptor isolates by parsing the Carbohydrate-Active EnZYmes database (http://www.cazy.org/), while CAZyme annotations in Caldicellulosiruptor acetigenus, Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain F32, Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Rt8.B8, Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain Wai35.B1, and Caldicellulosiruptor sp. strain NA10 were provided by Bernard Henrissat, AFMB University-Marseille (32). CAZymes present in the metagenomes were predicted by two methods. Initially, each metagenome was annotated by an HMM search using the dbCAN database (56). Catalytic domain and carbohydrate binding module predictions were further confirmed by searching Pfam family domains (57) using the integrated microbial genomes with microbiome samples (IMG/M) database (38). Pfam families included in the search were PF00150 (GH5), PF00759 (GH9), PF00331 (GH10), PF01670 (GH12), PF04616 (GH43), PF12891 (GH44), PF02011 (GH48), and PF00942 (CBM3).
Glucan conversion assay of recombinant CelA and Wai35_2053 in Caldicellulosiruptor bescii. Recombinant CelA (Athe_1867; native to C. bescii) and Wai35_2053 (gene locus N913DRAFT_2053 in IMG, and protein accession WP_045175321 in NCBI; native to C. danielii) were expressed using kanamycin resistance as a selective marker (16) in C. bescii with a 200-bp Pslp promoter (Athe_2303), Calkro_0402 terminator, and C-terminal histidine tag (pJMC046 [58]), as similarly designed and transformed previously (58). The engineered strains were initially cultured overnight in 500 ml of medium before being inoculated into a Sartorius Stedim BioStat Cplus 20-liter bioreactor, with pH controlled at pH 7 with NaOH and sparging with 1 liter/min of 20% CO2–80% N2 gas mix for 22 h. In both cultures, cells were grown in 516 complex medium with 50 μg/ml of kanamycin at 70°C. After growth, the culture was harvested, cooled to room temperature, and fractionated with the Millipore Pellicon mini-tangential flow filter (TFF) using a 2 mini 0.22-μm GVPP 0.1-m2 filter. Extracellular proteins were concentrated with a TFF system and Pellicon 2 mini BioMax 10-kDa-cutoff PES 0.1-m2 filter (Millipore), buffer exchanged and filtered into 20 mM sodium phosphate and 500 mM sodium chloride, pH 7.4, and purified with immobilized metal affinity chromatography (5-ml HisTrap HP nickel-Sepharose GE Healthcare column), operated according to the manufacturer's instructions using a Biologic DuoFlow fast-performance liquid chromatograph (FPLC; Bio-Rad). To quantify protein concentrations, the Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used.
To test glucan conversion of crystalline cellulose, 10 mg of Avicel was incubated in 1 ml of buffer (50 mM sodium acetate, 10 mM calcium chloride, 100 mM sodium chloride, 10 μg/ml of chloramphenicol, and 10 μg/ml of cycloheximide) with or without 0.15 mg/ml of enzyme (approximately 15 mg/g of protein to glucan), in triplicate, at 70°C, 75°C, and 80°C with shaking at 500 rpm. Samples were taken at time points over 7 days, after which enzymes were inactivated by boiling for 30 min. Samples were then analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for amounts of cellobiose and glucose, with percent glucan conversion calculated by comparing the total glucose equivalents released to the potential maximum glucose equivalents based on substrate mass.