https://doi.org/10.1016/j.syapm.2018.04.007
Title: Towards a congruent reclassification and nomenclature of the thermophilic species of the genus Pseudothermotoga within the order Thermotogales
Abstract: The phylum Thermotogae gathers thermophilic, hyperthermophic, mesophilic, and thermo-acidophilic anaerobic bacteria that are mostly originated from geothermally heated environments. The metabolic and phenotypic properties harbored by the
Thermotogae species questions the evolutionary events driving the emergence of this early branch of the universal tree of life. Recent reshaping of the
Thermotogae taxonomy has led to the description of a new genus, Pseudothermotoga, a sister group of the genus
Thermotoga within the order Thermotogales . Comparative genomics of both Pseudothermotoga and Thermotoga
spp., including 16S-rRNA-based phylogenetic, pan-genomic analysis as well as signature indel conservation, provided evidence that
Thermotoga caldifontis and Thermotoga profunda species should be reclassified within the genus Pseudothermotoga
and renamed as Pseudothermotoga caldifontis comb. nov. (type strain = AZM44c09 T ) and Pseudothermotoga profunda
comb. nov. (type strain = AZM34c06 T ), respectively. In addition, based upon whole-genome relatedness indices and DNA–DNA Hybridization results, the reclassification of
Pseudothermotoga lettingae and Pseudothermotoga subterranea as latter heterotypic synonyms of Pseudothermotoga elfii
is proposed. Finally, potential genetic elements resulting from the distinct evolutionary story of the
Thermotoga and Pseudothermotoga clades are discussed. Introduction Thermotoga maritima [19] embodies the original member of the phylum Thermotogae, which currently harbors at least 65 cultivated species distributed within 13 genera [23] . Although their true phylogenetic position remains a matter of debate [6,13] , the Thermotogales, which are closely related to Aquificales [36] , are commonly depicted as slowly evolving organisms defining an early branching lineage within the Bacteria [1] . The phylogenetic relatedness among the Thermotogales species do not reflect however the genetic variability of their genomes which undergo pervasive horizontal gene transfer (HGT), including gene influx from Firmicutes and Archaea [32,34,58] .
The phylum Thermotogae was originally described from singular characteristics carried by its representatives which thrive most often at high-temperature and exhibit a single-unit lipid membrane as well as a unique loose-fitting sheath structure (called “toga”) surrounding the cell [40] . Until recently, the phylum Thermotogae was believed to mainly comprise anaerobic, thermophilic (T opt ≥ 70 °C) and hyperthermophilic (T opt ≥ 80 °C), fermentative rod-shaped bacteria with the highest growth temperature (65–90 °C) under near-neutral pH conditions [14] . This view was dispelled with the discovery within the order Thermotogales of mesophilic [18,33] and moderately thermophilic acidophilic lineages comprising the genus Mesotoga and genera Mesoaciditoga and Athalassotoga [21,45] , respectively.
The phylum Thermotogae initially consisted within a single class Thermotogae ; a single order, Thermotogales ; and a single family, Thermotogaceae [44] . Recently however, Bhandari and Gupta have revisited the taxonomy of the Thermotogae by identifying molecular signatures from whole genome-based comparisons [5] . The new taxonomic proposal resulted from the identification of Conserved Signature Indels (CSIs) at several taxonomic levels that was fairly congruent with the inference of 16S rRNA-based phylogenetic relatedness of the Thermotogae species [5] . According to their findings, the phylum Thermotogae was redefined and divided into four separate orders ( Thermotogales , Kosmotogales , Petrotogales and Mesoaciditogales ) and five families ( Thermotogaceae , Fervidobacteriaceae , Kosmotogaceae , Petrotogaceae and Mesoaciditogaceae ). At the genus level, the original genus Thermotoga was proposed to be split into two genera Thermotoga and Pseudothermotoga . This conclusion was supported by 16S rRNA-based phylogenetic reconstruction and identification of clade-specific CSIs that indicated two distinct evolutionary histories of cultivated members of the original genus Thermotoga [5] . To date, the genus Pseudothermotoga contains P. elfii , P. lettingae , P. subterranea, P. hypogea and P. thermarum [35] . Bhandari and Gupta’s original work [5] echoes the modern taxonomy practice that refers to the use of the complete genome DNA sequence as the reference standard to determine both phylogeny and taxonomy of species [48] . With the rapid advances in affordable full genome sequencing, the current view of taxonomy thereby integrates whole genome-based comparisons [42,53] with an inflow of Overall Genome Relatedness indices (OGRI) [8] including digital DNA–DNA Hybridization (DDH) [30] , Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) [15,26] , or tetra nucleotide regression [52] . The ANI measure is currently the most accepted OGRI by the scientist community [25] .
Recently, two novel thermophilic anaerobic species were isolated from terrestrial hot springs in Japan and were classified as belonging to the genus Thermotoga as T. caldifontis and T. profunda [31] . Using multiphasic molecular approaches based on 16S rRNA, core-genome phylogeny, and identification of the Pseudothermotoga -specific CSIs, we provide evidence for reclassifying T. profunda and T. caldifontis within the genus Pseudothermotoga as Pseudothermotoga profunda comb. nov., and Pseudothermotoga caldifontis comb. nov., respectively. We also demonstrate by experimental DDH and OGRI measures that Pseudothermotoga lettingae and Pseudothermotoga subterranea should be reclassified as latter heterotypic synonyms of Pseudothermotoga elfii .
Methods Genome feature analysis Thermotoga and Pseudothermotoga genomes were retrieved from the NCBI ftp site ( ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ) under the accession numbers listed in Table 1 . The coding sequences (CDS) information was extracted from the gbk and GFF files. The GC content was estimated by the geecee function of the EMBOSS package 6.6.0.0 [46] . The hypothetical protein fractions were deduced from the protein annotation files (faa). The T. caldifontis and T. profunda genomes were included in the genus Pseudothermotoga for the genome feature analysis. Mean comparison of Thermotogaceae clades was performed by the non-parametric Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test. The Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test can be applied on small sample size and does not require any assumption about the variance equality and population distributions. The Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon tests, genome size, gene and GC contents were performed by GraphPad prism Software version 5.0. M, SD indicate mean and standard deviation, respectively.
SSU rRNA-based phylogeny The near-full length 16S rDNA sequences (>1300 pb) of the Thermotogae species were retrieved from the NCBI database ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ) and aligned with the MAFFT software v7.123b [24] . A maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree was constructed from 1624 nucleotide positions using the PhyML 3.1 algorithm [17] implemented in the Seaview package v4.6 [16] with GTR + I + G substitution model and 1000 bootstraps replicates. The phylogenetic tree was rooted using the Coprothermobacter proteolyticus IT3 (GU363592) and Coprothermobacter platensis (Y08935.1) 16S rDNA sequences since the genus Coprothermobacter was the closest branching out group in update SSU rRNA phylogenetic tree [57] .
Core-genome-based phylogeny The genome sequences of cultivated Thermotogaceae were retrieved from the NCBI accession numbers summarized in Table 1 . A core/pan-genome analysis was performed using the Roary pangenome pipeline v3.6.1 [37] . The Roary pipeline generated a core gene alignment from PRANK v.140110 [29] with a 50% identity cut-off level, as well as a gene presence/absence matrix. A maximum-likelyhood (ML) core-genome tree was inferred using PhyML 3.1 algorithm implemented in Seaview v4.6 with generalized time-reversible (GTR) and gamma distribution. PhyML approximated likelihood ratio (aLRT) SH-like values were indicated in a consensus tree. The roary plots.py scripts were used to combine the core-genome-based tree and the gene presence/absence matrix.
Molecular signatures within the genus Pseudothermotoga The CSIs identified as unique to the genus Pseudothermotoga were originated from reference proteins including the Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, the hypothetical protein Theth_0845, the hypothetical protein TM1140 and the hypothetical protein Tlet_0907 [5] . The reference protein sequences were retrieved from their corresponding genomes, P. lettingae TMO T (Tlet_907), T. maritima MSB8 T (TM1140), P. thermarum LA3 T (Therth_0845) and P. lettingae TMO T (Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase). The identification of the homologous proteins in the other Thermotogaceae genomes was performed by BLASTp similarity search [2] using each of the four reference proteins as seed. A protein set was built with each reference protein and their homologs within Thermotogaceae spp. The multiple sequence alignments of the protein sets were performed by MAFFT v.7123b [24] . The multiple sequence alignment was visualized by Jalview 2.9.0b2 [54] using ClustalX amino acid colors. Only the alignment part containing the CSI region was displayed. The CSI positions were reported according to the reference sequence in each CSI alignment.
DNA–DNA Hybridization dissimilarity measures DNA–DNA Hybridization (DDH) studies were performed using P . lettingae TMO T (DSM 14385) [4] and P. elfii SEBR 6459 T (DSM 9442) [43] . The DDH studies were carried out by the DSMZ as described by De Ley et al. [27] with some modifications [11,20] and using a model 2600 spectrophotometer equipped with a 2527-R thermoprogrammer and plotter (Gilford Instruments). Renaturation rates were computed with the TRANSFER.BAS program [22] .
Whole-genome relatedness indices The Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) and Average Amino Acid Identity (AAI) indices were deduced from pairwise genome [26] and conserved coding proteins [47] comparisons, respectively, using the available full Thermotogaceae genomes. The ANIb measure was preferred to ANIm since it was more appropriate for the comparison of distant related genomes and for Thermotoga spp. [28] . The ANIb relied on the sequence alignment tool MUMer [9] and was implemented in the JSpecies 1.2.1 software package ( www.imedea.uib.es/jspecies ). The ANIb range values (95–96%) correspond to the threshold for species delineation (32). The AAI calculation was performed by CompareM v0.0.21 software ( https://github.com/dparks1134/CompareM ), which uses DIAMOND 0.8.14 [7] for best reciprocal hits. Homology was defined with sequence similarity above 50%, sequence coverage above 75% and a minimum E-value of 1e-05. The resulting ANIb and AAI values were transformed in distance matrix and the hierarchical clustering was performed by hclust (R package) using a complete linkage method. The heatmap.2 function (R ggplots package) was used to show the ANI/AAI heatmap with a color scheme relied on ANI values.
Results and discussion Genomic characteristics within the Thermotogaceae Previous work revealed that the former genus Thermotoga consisted of two distinct groups of species according to their optimal growth temperature (T opt ) higher than 77 °C and lower than 70 °C for Thermotoga spp. and Pseudothermotoga spp., respectively [14] . With a T opt comprised between 60 °C and 70 °C, Thermotoga caldifontis and Thermotoga profunda shared growth temperature characteristics of Pseudothermotoga spp. In addition to this phenotypic feature, T. caldifontis and T. profunda carried genomic attributes more similar to the Pseudothermotoga than to the Thermotoga representatives ( Table 1 , Fig. 1 ). The mean genome size reached 2.12 Mb (SD = 0.073) and 1.84 Mb (SD = 0.044) within the genera Pseudothermotoga and Thermotoga , respectively ( Fig. 1 A). The genome size of Pseudothermotoga spp. was therefore significantly larger (Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test, p = 0.0007) and more variable than the Thermotoga genomes. Moreover, the genome size and growth temperature were negatively associated (r = −0.95) within Thermotogaceae ( Table 1 ). Recently, the “streamlining” concept has been proposed, i.e. that thermal adaptation involves reduction in the genome size [50] . As expected, the mean gene content of Pseudothermotoga species compared to Thermotoga species consisted of more coding sequences (Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test, p = 0.0007) ( Fig. 1 B), without affecting genome compactness (similar gene density, data not shown). The hypothetical protein fraction deduced from the CDS functional annotation was larger within the Pseudothermotoga spp. than within the Thermotoga spp. ( Table 1 ). Compared to the GC content of the Pseudothermotoga spp. (M = 42.83, SD = 5.601), those of Thermotoga spp. were slightly higher (not significant, p = 0.3308), and more similar to each other (M = 46.25, SD = 0.463). T. caldifontis and P . hypogea species had the highest GC content ( Table 1 , Fig. 1 C), were closely related but slightly differed from the rest of the Pseudothermotoga spp. because of their lower genome size and a higher GC content.
The phylogenetic relatedness of Thermotogae The evolutionary relationships of 65 species affiliated to the phylum Thermotogae were established by 16S rRNA-based phylogenetic inference ( Fig. 2 ). The recent description of thermoacidophilic Mesoaciditogales comprising only Mesoaciditoga lauensis and Athalassotoga saccharophila formed the deepest diverging lineage within this phylum [21,45] . The next well-supported branch separated both Petrotogales and Kosmotogales orders from the Thermotogales . The Petrotogales clade consists of Marinitoga spp. as well as the Geotoga and Petrotoga sister groups. Within the order Kosmotogales, the thermophilic Kosmotoga lineage notably harbors the K. olearia and the recent K. pacifica species, which demonstrate an outstandingly wide growth temperature range, 20–79 °C and 33–78 °C, respectively [10,23] . The closest relative of Kosmotoga was the mesophilic Mesotoga lineage, with lower growth temperature range (30–40 °C). However, the low bootstrap support (60, Fig. 2 ) of the Kosmotogales and Petrotogales dichotomy brought into question their true phylogenetic placement [41,45] despite a recent core-gene-based phylogeny with 17 Thermotogae species [23] . Finally, Thermotogales appeared to be the most diverse lineage, encompassing the genera Thermotoga , Pseudothermotoga , Thermosipho, Oceanotoga and Fervidobacterium . Within the order Thermotogales , the Thermotoga and Pseudothermotoga clades shared an exclusive common ancestor (red circle, Fig. 2 ); they were sister groups and were therefore more closely related to one another than to Thermosipho spp. From their most recent ancestor, more evolutionary change was observed within the Pseudothermotoga than within the Thermotoga lineage. However, the weakness of the phylogenetic signal from the 16S rRNA-based phylogeny did not offer an acceptable means to determine the relationships between Thermotoga species ( Fig. 2 ). The poorly resolved phylogeny of the Thermotoga representatives indicates a need to investigate additional phylogenetic markers (RpoB), core-genes phylogeny [23] or concatenated housekeeping proteins [5] . Additionally, a full comparative genomics study of the gene flow events undergone by the members of the two genera would shed light on their evolutionary history. This first phylogenetic approach suggested that Thermotoga profunda and Thermotoga caldifontis belong to the Pseudothermotoga clade rather than to Thermotoga ( Fig. 2 ).
The core-genome-based phylogeny of Thermotogaceae To confirm the taxonomic affiliation of Thermotoga caldifontis and Thermotoga profunda within the genus Pseudothermotoga , we investigated large-scale features of their genomes. The inference of core-genome-based phylogeny of the family Thermotogaceae relied on the analysis of the gene content of eight Thermotoga and six Pseudothermotoga species. The identification of the genes shared by all the available Thermotogaceae genomes (the core-genome) was deduced by gene orthology and resulted in 614 genes used for the Thermotogaceae phylogeny reconstruction. The core-genome-based phylogeny preserved P. hypogea as the closest relative of T. caldifontis , and the sister taxa P. elfii as the closest relatives of T. profunda ( Fig. 3 ), as was observed in the 16S rRNA-based phylogeny ( Fig. 2 ). The lack of consistency in the tree topology of Thermotoga spp. between 16S-rRNA-based and core-genome-based phylogeny can be explained by the low bootstrap branch supports for this clade ( Fig. 2 ). In Fig. 3 , primary genetic indicators of the dichotomy of genera Pseudothermotoga and Thermotoga were denoted with a gene presence (blue tile)/absence matrix, where the genes shared by two or more species are shown by aligned blue tiles or blocks. Similar gene content profiles of Thermotoga species resulted in a considerable core-genome size (number of genes shared by all the members) to the detriment of the accessory genome (shared by at least two members but not by all) and species-specific genes ( Fig. 3 ). In contrast, the Pseudothermotoga species showed more variability in their gene content profiles, which was exhibited by a lower core genome size but a greater accessory genome and more species-specific genes ( Fig. 3 ). The gene content showed that T. profunda and T. caldifontis were genetically more closely related to the Pseudothermotoga than to Thermotoga species. As discussed above, deciphering the distinct evolutionary history of the Thermotoga and Pseudothermotoga lineages will require more complex comparative genomics including gene family reconstruction, identification of species-specific genes, functional systems, and horizontal gene transfer, a dominant force of Thermotogales evolution [34] .
Molecular signatures of the Pseudothermotoga clade Previous genomic insights on the Thermotogae have brought out the discovery of four Conserved Signature Indels (CSIs) specific to the members of the Pseudothermotoga clade [5] . The Pseudothermotoga -specific CSIs have been identified from Thermotogales protein family alignments of the Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (one amino-acid insertion), the hypothetical Theth_0845 (5/6 amino-acid insertion), the hypothetical TM1140 (one amino-acid deletion) and the hypothetical Tlet_0907 (five amino-acid deletion) [5] . Presence of the four Pseudothermotoga -specific CSIs within Thermotoga profunda and Thermotoga caldifontis offers additional evidence of their reclassification proposal as Pseudothermotoga species. The multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of the homologs to the Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase ( Fig. 4 A) and to the hypothetical protein TM1140 ( Fig. 4 D) showed that the two Pseudothermotoga -specific CSIs, a Leucine insertion and a Leucine deletion, respectively, were also conserved in T. caldifontis and T. profunda ( Fig. 4 A, D). The next Pseudothermotoga -specific CSI, a five-amino-acid deletion derived from the MSA of homologs to the Tlet_0907 protein, was also shared by both T. caldifontis and T. profunda ( Fig. 4 B). However, Bhandari and Gupta reported a six-amino-acid deletion in their MSA of homologs to Tlet_907 [5] . In the same way, the MSA of homologs to the Theth_0845 protein exhibited also a slight modified pattern from the original Pseudothermotoga -specific CSI described in supplementary Fig. S39 of Bhandari and Gupta work [5] ( Fig. 4 C).
Our analysis led us to identify two slight modified Pseudothermotoga -specific CSIs ( Fig. 4 B,C) compared to the original work [5] , that could be explained by the MSA methods used and by the divergence of the selected sequences in the MSA. Using the T-COFFEE MSA method [3] (data not shown), the CSIs identified were congruent with our MAFFT-based analysis. The accuracy evaluation of the MSA methods (benchmark) commonly shows that consistency-based programs such as T-COFFEE and MAFFT exceed the other methods [38] . It is also important to emphasize that the previous identification of Pseudothermotoga -specific CSIs [5] involved only two Pseudothermotoga spp. ( P. lettingae and P. thermarum ) whereas all Pseudothermotoga spp. were included in our analysis ( Fig. 4 ). Finally, the pairwise identity matrix of the Theth_0845 protein family alignment ( Fig. 4 C) provided low sequence identity values (<35%) close to the twilight zone [49] that could stimulate debate about the true evolutionary relatedness of these proteins and especially the biological relevance of this CSI. The occurrence of the four Pseudothermotoga -specific CSIs in T. caldifontis and T. profunda is thereby an additional argument to reclassify these two organisms within the genus Pseudothermotoga as P. caldifontis comb. nov. and P. profunda comb. nov., respectively.
Species delineation within the genus Pseudothermotoga Fardeau et al. [12] , previously reported that DNA–DNA homologies between P. elfii strain G1 and P. subterranea DSM 9912 T , P. lettingae DSM 14385 T and P. elfii DSM 9442 T were 83%, 71.4% and 86%, respectively. This study also indicated a DNA–DNA homology of 83% between P. subterranea DSM 9912 T and P. elfii DSM 9442 T , and of 78% between P. subterranea DSM 9912 T and P. lettingae DSM 14385 T [12] . In our study, complementary DDH experiments were carried out in duplicate with P. lettingae DSM 14385 T and P. elfii DSM 9442 T , they indicated DNA–DNA homology of 94% (91.5% and 96.7%) between these two species. All DDH values of the pairwise species comparison were thereby above 70%. Consequently, all the Pseudothermotoga strains could not be differentiated at the species level by DDH when taking into account the recommendation of the ad hoc committee [55] , which advised a threshold value of 70% DDH similarity for the definition of bacterial species.
The close relationship linking DDH and ANI values [15,25] led us to calculate ANI indices for estimating overall genome similarity and clarifying the genetic relationships within the genus Pseudothermotoga . In addition to ANI indices, the Amino Acid Identity (AAI) measure was also considered for its robustness for divergent species [47] . Within the Thermotogaceae genomes, the estimated ANI and AAI values ranged from 64.19 to 99.96% and from 63.32 to 99.98%, respectively. The double ANI–AAI clustering distinguished the Pseudothermotoga and Thermotoga genera ( Fig. 5 ). The Thermotoga clustering showed intra-species relationships for Thermotoga sp. Xyl 54, Thermotoga . sp Cell2, Thermotoga . sp. TBGT1765 and Thermotoga . sp TBGT1766 (AAI and ANI values >98). Strikingly, both ANI and AAI values revealed intra-species relationships between P. elfii and P. lettingae with 99.12% and 99.5% of identity level, respectively. Based upon DDH and ANI–AAI results, P. elfii , P. lettingae and P. subterranea species should be considered as heterotypic synonyms. Herein we propose to unite these three species. According to rules 38, 42 and 24b(2) of the Bacteriological Code [39] , the name Pseudothermotoga elfii has priority and hence should be used for the unified taxon.
Conclusions With the significant advances in full genome sequencing, modern taxonomy practice promotes the use of gene marker-based/core-genome-based phylogenetic inferences, comparative genomics, and whole genome relatedness indices as reliable methods for taxonomic classification [8,42,51,53] . As a result, investigation of the Thermotoga and Pseudothermotoga genera by modern taxonomy practice and classical DDH measures puts forward congruent classification and nomenclature of these genera within the Thermotogaceae family. Our data show that Thermotoga caldifontis and Thermotoga profunda species share similar features (genome size, CDS number) with the Pseudotermotoga species. They are also phylogenetically related to Pseudothermotoga species, and carry the four Pseudothermotoga -specific CSIs. Moreover, a preliminary pan-genomic analysis shows that T. profunda and T. caldifontis are genetically more closely related to the Pseudothermotoga spp. We thereby propose to reclassify Thermotoga caldifontis and Thermotoga profunda as Pseudothermotoga caldifontis comb. nov. and Pseudothermotoga profunda comb. nov., respectively. We also demonstrate that Pseudothermotoga elfii, P. subterranea and P. lettingae are heterotypic synonyms and should therefore be united with the priority name of Pseudothermotoga elfii . Despite the considerable effort needed to understand the Thermotogae phylogenetic relationships [13,58] , the evolutionary events driving Thermotogae sub-groups remain blurred. Further complex comparative genomics may assist the deciphering of the evolutionary mechanisms within Thermotogae .
Description of Pseudothermotoga profunda comb. nov. Pseudothermotoga profunda (pro.fun’da L. fem. adj. profunda deep, pertaining to the source of isolation of the type strain)
Basonym: Thermotoga profunda Mori et al. 2014. The description of this taxon is the same as that given previously [31] . The type strain is AZM34c06 T = NBRC 106115 T = DSM 23275 T . The sequence accession number (16S rRNA gene) for the type strain is NR_133904.1. The accession number of the genome sequence is AP014510.
Description of Pseudothermotoga caldifontis comb. nov. Pseudothermotoga caldifontis (cal.di.fon’tis. L. adj. caldus hot; L. masc. n. fons, fontis a spring, N.L. gen. n. caldifontis of a hot spring, pertaining to the source of isolation of the type strain)
Basonym: Thermotoga caldifontis Mori et al. 2014. The description of this taxon is the same as that given previously [31] . The type strain is AZM44c09 T = NBRC 106116 T = DSM 23272 T . The sequence accession number (16S rRNA gene) for the type strain is NR_133903.1. The accession number of the genome sequence is AP014509.
Emended description of the genus Pseudothermotoga Bhandari and Gupta 2014 The morphological and physiological description of this genus, whose type species is Pseudothermotoga thermarum [5] , remains the same as described by Windberger et al. [56] . Other species belonging this genus are P. profunda (Basonym: T. profunda ) and P. caldifontis (Basonym: Thermotoga caldifontis ) (Mori et al. [31] ).
Emended description of the species Pseudothermotoga elfii Bhandari and Gupta 2014 The characteristics of this species are as described by Ravot et al. [43] with the following amendments. The following substrates may be used: methanol, lactate, pyruvate, galactose, cellobiose, glycerol, starch, xylan, pectin, methylamine, dimethylamine, trimethylamine, 2-oxoglutarate, serine, yeast extract, peptone, gelatin and casamino acids. Acetate, betaine, leucine, isoleucine, valine, formate and H 2 /CO 2 (80/20, v/v) may be oxidized either in the presence of thiosulfate or a hydrogenotrophic methanogen as electron acceptor. Elemental sulfur, Fe(III) and anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonate may serve as electron acceptors. The type strain is DSM 9442 T = ATCC 51869T.