https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2018.11.004
Title: Comparative genome analysis of arsenic reducing, hydrocarbon metabolizing groundwater bacterium Achromobacter sp. KAs 3-5(T) explains its competitive edge for survival in aquifer environment
Abstract: Whole genome sequence of arsenic (As) reducing, hydrocarbon metabolizing groundwater bacterium
Achromobacter sp. KAs 3-5 T was explored to understand the genomic basis of its As-ecophysiology and niche adaptation in aquifer environment. The genome (5.6 Mbp, 65.5 G + C mol %) encodes 4840 proteins, 1138 enzymes, 53 tRNAs, 11 rRNAs, 608 signal peptides, and 1.13% horizontally transferred genes. Presence of genes encoding cytosolic As
5+ -reduction ( ars RCBH, ACR3), aromatics utilization ( bph , naph , cat ABC, box ABCD, gen ACB), Fe-transformation (
ton B, achromobactin, FUR, FeR), and denitrification ( nar , nap ) processes were observed and validated through proteomics. Phylogenomic analysis (< 90% ANI, < 50% DDH) confirmed strain KAs 3-5
T to be a novel representative of the genus Achromobacter . An asymptotic open pan-genome (20,855 genes) and high correlation between genomic and ecological diversity suggested niche preference ability of this genus. Assemblage of species specific genes affiliated to transcription-regulation, membrane transport, and redox-transformation explained the strain's competitive survival strategies in As-rich oligotrophic groundwater.
Introduction Microbe mediated mobilization of solid phase arsenic (As) into the groundwater (exceeding the permissible limit of 10 μg As/L) of South-East Asiatic countries has threatened the life of millions of people, relying on groundwater as primary drinking water resource [ 1–3 ]. The resident microorganisms in sub-surface aquifer engaged in complex interactions with hydrogeological features are believed to be the most precarious factor for As-release from the host sediment [ 4–6 ]. Extensive research conducted in the last decade has unanimously agreed upon the role of taxonomically diverse bacterial populations (most predominantly Alph a-, Beta -, Gamma-proteobacteria , Firmicutes , Actinobacteria , Deinococcus - Thermus , etc.) that influence As geochemistry by virtue of their dynamic physiological activities [ 7–15 ]. Although many studies have shed light on bacteria-As interaction at molecular level to understand the As biogeochemistry [ 16 , 17 ], the genome wide studies on native As transforming bacteria from contaminated groundwater remains unexplored and hence needs to be conducted in detail.
Arsenic transforming bacteria deploy an array of metabolic routes that include oxidation [ 18 ], reduction [ 19 ], respiration [ 20 ], and methylation [ 21 ], affecting As speciation and mobilization in alluvial groundwater. Among the several postulated theories on As-release, microbial reduction of solid phase As 5+ or Fe 3+ coupled with oxidation of natural organic matter (NOM) [hydrocarbon derivatives and simpler organics] has gained considerable scientific interest [ 22 , 23 ]. The reduced As species (As 3+ ), is more soluble and has poor affinity towards Fe-rich host mineral phases, while the reduced Fe (Fe 2+ ) adsorbs As poorly, thus allowing As release under reductive condition. The feasibility of the reduction mechanisms depends considerably on the nature of NOM i.e. its sedimentary origin (as peat layers) or natural/anthropogenic sources (surface-derived materials or petroleum-derived from deeper thermally mature sediments) [ 3 , 24–27 ]. A number of microcosm-based studies have also demonstrated the metal reduction activities of metal-reducing bacteria stimulated by organic matter input [ 2 , 28–30 ]. Several investigators have emphasized the role of dissimilatory As and Fe reducing bacteria as the key factor for As release. Considering the thermodynamic feasibility of such reductions coupled to the available labile organic carbon in oligotrophic groundwater, the processes remain unclear. Though recent reports have shown the preferential use of hydrocarbons by some groundwater bacteria and their As-transforming abilities, none of them emphasized the genetic and molecular basis in detail [ 5 , 14 , 15 ]. Any study encompassing the details of metabolism of organic carbon coupled to As reduction under anaerobic condition and exploring the detailed genomic mechanisms underlying As-mobilization processes by groundwater bacteria could be of considerable significance.
The advent of omics technology including genome sequencing, genomic analysis (functional and comparative genomics), and proteomics have allowed researchers to gain system level understanding on metabolic and genomic potential of organisms and allows to identify physiological pathways of metal transformation, their genetic localization, regulatory expression in a global way [ 31 , 32 ]. With respect to As-transformation mechanisms, till date, genomes of 84 As-metabolizing strains from diverse habitat have been sequenced and available in public database, where Proteobacteria [56 genomes; - Beta (16 genomes), - Gamma (17), - Alpha (15), − Delta (4), and - Epsilon (4) sub classes] represented the highest. Noticeably, neither of the genomes of any As-transforming bacteria from the As-contaminated groundwater has been sequenced nor their proteomics responses are studied. In recent years, cultivation independent (metagenomics) studies have highlighted the abundance and activities of Betaproteobacteria ( Achromobacter and Alcaligenes of Alcaligenaceae ) in As-contaminated alluvial groundwater and their versatile physiological abilities affecting As homeostasis processes [ 9 , 10 , 33 , 34 ]. With respect to the members of the family Alcaligenaceae , genomes of only three organisms are sequenced until today [two Achromobacter members ( A. arsenitoxydans from As-impacted sediment, and A. piechaudii from soil), and one Alcaligenesfaecalis ], but the reports only highlighted the As 3+ oxidation abilities of such organisms. Members of Achromobacter spp. are of particular interest because of their (i) ubiquity in As-contaminated environment, (ii) broad ecological significance with respect to As/Cr -biotransformation [ 35 , 36 ], nitrate/nitrite reduction [ 37 ], and biphenyl/hydrocarbon metabolism [ 38 , 39 ]. Despite wide environmental implication and broad metabolic role of Achromobacter , genomic descriptions of only some pathovars have been highlighted. Although few of the studies have emphasized the proteomics response of phenol, pyrene, and butyl-ether degrading [ 40–42 ] Achromobacter members, none of the members were highlighted in terms of hydrocarbon utilization coupled with As transformation from any groundwater ecosystem. The genomic and proteomic study involving such members from As-impacted groundwater is of great importance to a) shed light on the As-transformative processes to understand the mobilization of sediment bound As into groundwater ecosystem, b) bacterial mechanisms for colonization of groundwater niches, and c) genomic diversity of such members in the environment [ 43 , 44 ].
In our previous investigation, we described one Achromobacter strain KAs 3-5 T from As-contaminated groundwater of Bengal basin, highlighting its taxonomic position, and preferential metabolic abilities to utilize broad range of carbon and electron sources as well as As-transformation abilities [ 9 , 45 ]. In the light of current question on As release processes by groundwater bacteria, the present study describes the whole genome sequencing, comparative sequence analysis of an groundwater Achromobacter strain from As-rich Bengal groundwater. The genomic and proteomic basis of As-transformation coupled to hydrocarbon based organic matter oxidation, strategies for competitive nutrient acquisition within oligotrophic groundwater environment and pan-genomics for genomic as well as species level diversity was deciphered.
Results and discussion Arsenic transformation by strain KAs 3-5T The As-transformation ability of the strain KAs 3-5 T was studied in presence of four different carbon sources (glucose, lactate, benzene, and naphthalene). The carbon sources were selected based on their availability in local groundwater and prior information about the physiological propertiesof strain KAs 3-5 T . Cells of the strain KAs 3-5 T showed its ability to reduce As 5+ while growing under anaerobic condition with all the four carbon (glucose, lactate, benzene, and naphthalene) sources ( Fig. 1 a ).The rate of As 5+ -reduction was found to be coupled to the carbon substrate utilization, where >75% of the added As 5+ (2 mM) was reduced to As 3+ in 50 h. Glucose was found to be most preferred (75%, 0.12 mmol h −1 ), followed by lactate (74%, 0.11 mmol h −1 ), benzene, and naphthalene (30–35%, 0.07 mmol h −1 ). Highest biomass yield (g mol −1 substrate) was achieved for benzene (42.0) for As 5+ reduction followed by naphthalene, glucose and lactate. The details of the growth energetics are presented in Table 1 . Previous physiological studies involving bacterial strains have confirmed the As 5+ reduction potential of many proteobacterial members ( Shewanella , Citrobacter , Comamonas etc.), where >50% reduction of 5–10 mM of added As 5+ within 12 h of growth was achieved under aerobic condition with lactate and yeast extract as carbon sources [ 36 , 46 , 47 ]. With respect to anaerobic As 5+ reduction by indigenous groundwater bacteria, in recent time, one Rhizobium sp. KAs 5–22 from Bengal groundwater showed reduction of 5 mM of As 5+ within 80 h of anaerobic growth with concomitant release of As 3+ in the aqueous medium using alkane hydrocarbons as sole carbon substrates [ 14 ]. The simultaneous utilization of aromatic hydrocarbons (benzene and naphthalene) with reduction of As 5+ under anaerobic condition by strain KAs 3-5 T is noted to be interesting. Electron microscopy (SEM, TEM) was conducted to see the fate of As with respect to cellular metabolism. The scanning micrographs did not show any significant difference in the cell structure of strain KAs 3-5 T in sugars and hydrocarbons but showed marked difference in terms of surface properties, where cells formed aggregation and found to be clumped around the hydrocarbon crystals ( Fig. 1 b). A marked change in cell surface charge (zeta potential) was observed for cells grown in benzene and naphthalene with average surface charge of -2.4 mV, while for glucose and lactate, it was −22.5 mV, indicating the increase in cellular hydrophobicity for better hydrocarbon uptake and utilization [ 48 , 49 ]. The surfaces of cells have been further analyzed using EDX equipped with SEM, where cell surface showed distinct peak for As (0.02–0.05 wt%) in all the carbon sources used ( Fig. 1 b). The SEM-EDX studies suggested that As was found to be adsorbed on the cell surface, corroborating earlier reports on cellular and extracellular adsorption of As [ 50–52 ]. Transmission electron microscopy was performed to detect intracellular changes and As uptake/accumulation by cells. The ultrastructure of cells clearly demonstrated the effect of hydrocarbons on cells indicating higher cytoplasmic condensation and vacuolation ( Fig. 1 c), while no such changes were observed for glucose and lactate grown cells. The intracellular EDX spectrum showed the presence of higher fraction of As in the cells (0.08–0.3 wt% As) ( Fig. 1 c) suggesting the As-uptake processes by strain KAs 3-5 T from the medium aqueous phase and As metabolism through cytoplasmic transformative pathways [ 5 , 10 , 14 , 15 , 43 ]. Previous investigators have demonstrated the aerobic utilization of naphthalene, benzene, and several other polyphenols hydrocarbons by Achromobacter spp., where 90% of the substrates were utilized within 24–48 h [ 53–56 ] and many Achromobacter members have also been reported to degrade various xenobiotic compounds [ 44 , 57 , 58 ]. But no such anaerobic As 5+ -reduction and -transformation coupled to hydrocarbon utilization by any Achromobacter members has been described. Since the origin of hydrocarbons are likely to be bio-geogenic and mostly either from inter-sedimentary organic peat layers in alluvial sediment of Bengal basin, the inhabitant bacteria likely to have evolved catabolic machinery to transform As while utilizing all possible resources [ 9 , 27 , 59 , 60 ]. Hence, As 5+ transformation by such groundwater bacteria is highly correlated to their intrinsic As-homeostasis mechanisms within contaminated groundwater environment. Hence genetic determinants for such properties were evaluated in the strain KAs 3-5 T to validate the physiological data.
Proteomic response of strain KAs 3-5T through 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-D GE) Differential protein synthesis patterns of Achromobacter sp. KAs 3-5 T was studied by cultivating the cells in the presence and absence of 2 mM of As 5+ with lactate and naphthalene as principal organic carbon sources. The proteomic study was undertaken to understand the global gene expression profile (at protein level) of strain KAs 3-5 T during the course of cellular interaction with As and oxidation of organic matter. Separation of total cellular proteins revealed 75 well expressed protein spots on 2-D PAGE gel. Most of the proteins under control and As-treatment showed good resolution with pH 3–10, with molecular weight in the range of 11–120 kDa (Fig. S1). Out of all, only 65 spots displayed good identity score (MASCOT score of >70), hence subjected to identification. The data demonstrated that 25 proteins to be universally expressed (conserved) without any change of expression in either of the conditions indicating their house-keeping functions during cellular metabolism ( Table 2 ). Annotation of the conserved proteins into COG categories showed their maximum assignments to general function prediction, energy production-conversion, and fatty acid-phospholipid metabolism. By the quantitative comparison of spot volume, 30 proteins showed significantly ( p < .05) differential change in expression (1.2 fold change), where 11 were down-regulated and 19 were up-regulated under As-amended condition ( Table 3 ). The down-regulated proteins were assigned to COG functions of carbohydrate and nucleotide metabolism, general function prediction, and post-translational modification. It was observed that, the As amendment in the medium negatively imparted the motility of the cells of strain KAs 3-5 T showing a 3 fold decrease in flagellin expression. On the contrary, the 19 up-regulated proteins were allocated to restricted/specific COG functions viz. defense mechanism (ArsC, ArsH), xenobiotic degradation (AroE, DoxF), translation-ribosomal biogenesis (TufB, PheT, ValS), inorganic ion transport-metabolism, signal transduction (NuoE), and unknown functions (hypothetical proteins). When comparative proteomic response of bacterial strains under As stress were compared, a set of molecular markers were identified (Table S1). Across various Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial taxa, protein markers belonging to As transformation (ArsC, ArsH, Aio), flagellation (Fla), transcription-translation (EfTu), ABC transporters, t-RNA synthetases, NADH quinone oxido-reductases, and hypothetical proteins were found to be differentially expressed under As stress [ 61–72 ], thus, corroborating the findings of our study. The expressions of unique proteins clearly demarcated the metabolic novelty of strain KAs 3-5 T . The identification of molecular markers in Achromobacter sp. strain KAs 3-5 T under As transformative conditions could help in understanding the metabolic behaviour of such members in As-contaminated groundwater or other As-impacted habitat. The proteomics study provided the comprehensive gene expression of strain KAs 3-5 T under As growth coupled to organic carbon utilization by Achromobacter members in As-contaminated groundwater environment.
Genome sequencing and functional annotation The genome of Achromobacter sp. KAs 3-5 T consists of 5,675,703 bases (4,991,071 coding bases), with 6019 coding sequences (98.72% of CDS), 53 structural t-RNAs, 11 rRNAs (two 16S rRNA, three 23S rRNA, and six 5S rRNA), and 14 other RNAs; the values corroborates well with the genomic details of previously sequenced Achromobacter genomes ( Table 4 ). Genes are distributed evenly with ~52% being transcribed from the forward strand and ~48% from the complementary strand. The members of the genus Achromobacter generally harbour moderate to large genomic size of 5.5–7.3 Mb within Alcaligenaceae [ 73 , 74 ]. Genomic comparisons indicated that genome (5.67 Mb) of strain KAs 3-5 T is within the genomic size range of Achromobacter with comparable gene counts. Organisms residing in freshwater and oligotrophic environment are found to harbour larger genome sizes and low 16S copy number (1–3) and supposed to be more ecologically successful in environments where resources are scarce and diverse [ 32 ]. These observations are in accordance with our results, as the strain KAs 3-5 T is isolated from oligotrophic groundwater habitat, the higher genome size and low 16S copy is highly justified. A high genomic GC content of 65.5 mol% of strain KAs 3-5 T was in line with other Achromobacter members (65–68 mol%), possibly reflecting the strain's intrinsic ability to cope up with extreme conditions and genomic stability to bear DNA damage under environmental adversity [ 75 ]. Analysis of all the CDS through PATRIC displayed that the strain KAs 3-5 T shared a high level of proteome similarity (93.0%) with Betaproteobacteria members and > 85.0% Achromobacter members ( A. arsenitoxydans SY8 and A . xylosoxidans A8). RAST enabled annotation predicted a total of 479 genomic subsystems of which the abundant ( n > 80) were amino acids and derivatives ( n = 785 CDS), carbohydrates (415), membrane transport (405), cofactors, vitamins and pigments (291), fatty acids, lipids, and isoprenoids (287), protein metabolism (281), stress response (195), respiration (195), metabolism of aromatic compounds (166), motility and chemotaxis (121), sulphur (85) and nitrogen (81) metabolism.The genome of strain KAs3-5 T showed a total of 4840 protein encoding genes (79.4% CDS), 1138 (18.6%) enzymes, 608 (9.5%) signal peptides, 1335 (20.6%) transmembrane proteins, 3646 (59.8%) COG classes, 1415 (23.2%) KEGG pathways, and 2418 (39.6%) KEGG-orthologs. Among all compared genomes, A. denitrificans NBRC 15125, A. insolitus DSM 23807, and A. xylosoxidans C54 showed relatively higher gene allocations in all the functional categories ( Table 4 ), which might be attributed to their slightly higher genomic size and hence higher percentage of transferred genes. Prophage integration and genomic islands (GIs; altered GC content regions) in bacterial genomes confers acquisition of novel genes for survival in aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems [ 76 , 77 ]. They can constitute of 20% of a bacterial genome (most gram-negative organisms), eventually leading to strain diversification [ 31 ]. In this study, a total of three cryptic (incomplete) prophages: region-1 (29.2 Kb, 28 CDS), region-2 (21.8 Kb, 11 CDS), and region-3 (40.9 Kb, 26 CDS) (Fig. S2a) and seven distinct GIs (highest among all compared genomes) were identified in the genome of strain KAs 3-5 T . Among GIs, GI-1 and GI-3 are found to be the longest encoding many hypothetical proteins, while, GI-4, 5 and 7 encode mobile elements, phage associated proteins, transcriptional regulators, and Type-I restriction modification system respectively, which were analyzed to be transferred from Proteobacteria members. The ORFs encoding glutamate-aspartate transport and binding, flagellar assembly proteins, GTP-binding proteins and quinone oxido-reductases were evident in GI-2 indicating its mere function in the nutrient acquisition and chemotaxis [ 78–80 ]. Other Achromobacter genomes showed less number of GIs (4–5) mostly encoding hypothetical proteins. The reason of higher GIs in strain KAs 3-5 T is attributed to the fact that the viruses are very common in oligotrophic environments [ 81 , 82 ] performing gene transfers in microbial taxa and interestingly, strain KAs 3-5 T is found to inhabit oligotrophic groundwater ecosystem, thus having higher GIs for coping environmental stress in groundwater habitat. Genome functional annotation through COG showed abundance of genes (> 5% of genes) towards amino acid transport and metabolism (E, 12.74%), general function prediction (R, 10.76%), unknown function category (S, 10.18% as hypothetical proteins), energy production and conservation (C, 6.90%), inorganic ion transport and metabolism (P, 6.0%), and signal transduction mechanisms (T, 5.9%). The t -test analysis involving all the compared Achromobacter genomes showed a significantly higher gene allocation within coenzyme transport-metabolism, signal transduction, and energy production-conversion (Fig. S2b) for strain KAs 3-5 T , while for the rest of the COG functional classes, it was lower than the average of all the genomes compared.
Functional profiling was used to analyse differentially enriched functions (COGs and enzymes) in all the compared Achromobacter strains based upon the top 50 gene complements (abundant gene copies per each genome, copies are normalized by genome size). The analysis revealed that among top COG categories, transcriptional regulators for gene expression (LysR and GntR) were highly abundant in all of the Achromobacter genomes followed by various transporters, permeases, efflux pumps for sugars, amino acids, and Fe 3+ ( Fig. 2 ). The results clearly implied that these strains are highly engaged in transport of a wide variety of substrates across extra- and intracellular membranes, which is consistent with the Achromobacter ability for degradation of a wide range of xenobiotics. Among top 50 enzyme classes, various trans-membrane hydrolases, transferases (glutathione, amino acid, glycosyl, polar metabolites), oxido-reductases (cytochrome C, NADH ubiquinone, acyl carrier protein) are found to be the abundant ( Fig. 2 ). The enhanced gene allocations under these categories are highly correlated with the adaptability of KAs 3-5 T and Achromobacter members towards contaminated, stressed, and redox-active environment (such as groundwater) ecosystem [ 5 , 14 , 15 , 32 ].
Taxono-genomic and pan-genomic analysis A genome wide comparative analysis involving taxono-genomic and pan-genomics was undertaken to establish the taxonomic position, uniqueness of strain KAs 3-5 T among the Achromobacter members, and species and genomic diversity of Achromobacter . The 16S rRNA gene sequence based neighbour-joining phylogenetic reconstruction showed a close phylogenetic relatedness of KAs 3-5 T with Achromobacter arsenitoxydans SY8 (98.9% similarity), A. mucicolens LMG 26685 T / A. spanius LMG 5911 T (98.9%), and A. marplatensis CCUG 56371 (98.7%), which have been isolated from As-impacted sediment and pentachlorophenol-contaminated soil, respectively ( Fig. 3 a). Based on the published criteria of 98.7% cut-off of rDNA similarity to consider a new species [ 83 ], strain KAs 3-5 T showed highest affiliation to A. mucicolens LMG 26685 T , as A. arsenitoxydans SY8 is not validly described. But considering the observed positions of the species members, the phylogeny needs to be revised. This phylogenetic clustering of strain KAs 3-5 T is likely the result of similar evolutionary changes and shared metabolic tendency, as strain KAs 3-5 T can transform As by metabolizing hydrocarbons and strains SY8 and CCUG 56371 can oxidize As 3+ and pentachlorophenol [ 73 , 84 ] respectively. Standard marker gene based MLSA and ribosomal MLST confirmed highest sequence similarities of KAs 3-5 T with A. arsenitoxydans SY8 and A. xylosoxidans A8 as nearest genomic neighbours, but with a distinct phylogenetic clade ( Fig. 3 b) formed by strain KAs 3-5 T , thus indicating its affiliation to the genus Achromobacter with species level distinction. The ANI value of <90.0% and DDH of 45–47% between KAs 3-5 T and Achromobacter members (Fig. S3 a) clearly demonstrated the species novelty, as ANI value of 95.0% and 70% DDH, has been recommended as a threshold for species demarcation [ 83 , 85 ]. Comparison of protein spectrum through MALDI-TOF MS analysis showed differential mass spectral ( m / z ) peaks at 4400, 7180, 7250, 7600, 8650, 9980 (Fig. S3b) among the compared phylogenetic neighbours and provided indication of species level differences of strain KAs 3-5 T . Genomic alignments through dot-plot analysis showed a fair genomic rearrangement in the genome of KAs3-5 T mostly consisting of deletions and inversions (Fig. S3c), including repeat regions (as short diagonals). The regions of scaffold_15 and scaffold_19 of KAs 3-5 T showed highest similarities to the genomic regions of A. arsenitoxydans SY8 and A. xylosoxidans A8. The phylogenomic analysis indicated the strain is effectively discriminated to be a new member within the genus Achromobacter , and designated to be a novel species.
A genome wide comparative analysis involving taxono-genomic and pan-genomics was undertaken to establish the taxonomic position, uniqueness of strain KAs 3-5 T among the Achromobacter members, and species and genomic diversity of Achromobacter . The 16S rRNA gene sequence based neighbour-joining phylogenetic reconstruction showed a close phylogenetic relatedness of KAs 3-5 T with Achromobacter arsenitoxydans SY8 (98.9% similarity), A. mucicolens LMG 26685 T / A. spanius LMG 5911 T (98.9%), and A. marplatensis CCUG 56371 (98.7%), which have been isolated from As-impacted sediment and pentachlorophenol-contaminated soil, respectively ( Fig. 3 a). Based on the published criteria of 98.7% cut-off of rDNA similarity to consider a new species [ 83 ], strain KAs 3-5 T showed highest affiliation to A. mucicolens LMG 26685 T , as A. arsenitoxydans SY8 is not validly described. But considering the observed positions of the species members, the phylogeny needs to be revised. This phylogenetic clustering of strain KAs 3-5 T is likely the result of similar evolutionary changes and shared metabolic tendency, as strain KAs 3-5 T can transform As by metabolizing hydrocarbons and strains SY8 and CCUG 56371 can oxidize As 3+ and pentachlorophenol [ 73 , 84 ] respectively. Standard marker gene based MLSA and ribosomal MLST confirmed highest sequence similarities of KAs 3-5 T with A. arsenitoxydans SY8 and A. xylosoxidans A8 as nearest genomic neighbours, but with a distinct phylogenetic clade ( Fig. 3 b) formed by strain KAs 3-5 T , thus indicating its affiliation to the genus Achromobacter with species level distinction. The ANI value of <90.0% and DDH of 45–47% between KAs 3-5 T and Achromobacter members (Fig.S3a) clearly demonstrated the species novelty, as ANI value of 95.0% and 70% DDH, has been recommended as a threshold for species demarcation [ 83 , 85 ]. Comparison of protein spectrum through MALDI-TOF MS analysis showed differential mass spectral ( m / z ) peaks at 4400, 7180, 7250, 7600, 8650, 9980 (Fig. S3b) among the compared phylogenetic neighbours and provided indication of species level differences of strain KAs 3-5 T . Genomic alignments through dot-plot analysis showed a fair genomic rearrangement in the genome of KAs3-5 T mostly consisting of deletions and inversions (Fig. S3c), including repeat regions (as short diagonals). The regions of scaffold_15 and scaffold_19 of KAs 3-5 T showed highest similarities to the genomic regions of A. arsenitoxydans SY8 and A. xylosoxidans A8. The phylogenomic analysis indicated the strain is effectively discriminated to be a new member within the genus Achromobacter , and designated to be a novel species.
Pan-genomic analysis is employed to decipher the genomic diversity within species members, that consist of distinct core and accessory gene complements [ 77 ]. The pan-genome analysis involving 60 Achromobacter genomes revealed that Achromobacter pan-genome consists of 20,855 genes, out of which 1840 represented the core gene complements (31.8% of an average genome). As expected, COG functional annotation of core genes showed predominance of cellular growth-motility, metabolism of glycan, nucleotide, cofactors and vitamins, drug resistance, and transcription-translation processes ( Fig. 4 a ). However, 918 genes (49%) out of 1840 could be reliably annotated as “essential genes” in DEG database, and rest were identified to be involved in basic metabolic functions. Among accessory genome (19,015 genes), 12,252 genes were of dispensable (present in either of any or more than one strain) and 6763 belongs to species specific genes (singletons or unique). The COG annotation of accessory genome showed prevalence (1.2–1.5 fold increase of gene allocation w.r.t core genes) of components of inorganic ion transport, secondary metabolism, energy conversion, lipid metabolism, signal transduction, secretion-transport, and general function prediction ( Fig. 4 a). It has been reported that for organisms residing in soil, freshwater, and other oligotrophic habitat (ubiquitous taxa), increase in the gene allocations towards inorganic ion transport and metabolism, secondary metabolism, xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism, signal transduction is indicative of continual genomic flux and wide adaptation potential of taxa to varied environment [ 32 , 86 ]. Thus, it is evident that Achromobacter members are in continual genomic flux and possess the ability to adapt wide environmental niches. The pan-genome size of Achromobacter increased exponentially with the number of genomes added into the dataset, and the pan-genome curve displayed an asymptotic trend demonstrating that 60 genomes were near sufficient to describe the complete genetic catalogue of Achromobacter ( Fig. 4 b). The new genes added per each genome showed a decreasing trend, (stabilized to 30 genes per genome after 52nd genome added) suggested that further Achromobacter genomes will result minor changes in Achromobacter gene inventory, indicating its partially open pan genomic structure [ 87 , 88 ]. Interestingly, with respect to strain KAs 3-5 T , the unique genes were allocated to COG categories of metabolism of -amino acids, −terpenoid and polyketide, −lipids, secondary metabolite biosynthesis, energy and signal transduction, xenobiotic biodegradation, and membrane transport (particularly for Fe, Co, Zn, and multidrug efflux) and showed its highest identity to Escherichia coli K-12 and Pseudomonas spp. These observations are in good agreement with the GIs data indicating its horizontal acquaintance of genes for novel functions in oligotrophic groundwater environment. Phylogenetic reconstruction based on the conserved core gene set of 60 Achromobacter genomes showed clear trend of phylogenetic clustering of strains isolated from similar habitat into two major phylogenetic groups: Gr I and Gr II (Fig. S4). For instance, Gr I clade involving KAs 3-5 T (from As-impacted groundwater) possesses all the environmental isolates viz. A. spanius CGMCC 9173, Achromobacter sp. LC 458, A. arsenitoxydans SY8 [ 52 ], A. arsenitoxydans A8, Achromobacter sp. root 83 isolated from soil, cave surface layer, As-impacted sediment, contaminated soil, and root respectively. While, the 2nd cluster (Gr II) exclusively represented the isolates of clinical significance from both cystic and non-cystic fibrosis patients.The results indicated that the phylogenetic clustering of genomes was similar that of habitat-specific grouping of Achromobacter strains, suggesting the species adaptability towards varied environment, and niche diversity [ 89–91 ].
Genes related to As-transformation and hydrocarbon mineralization Considering the anoxic As 5+ -reduction and hydrocarbons utilization property of KAs 3-5 T , the genetic determinants responsible for such activities were queried in the genome. The genes encoding arsenate reductase ars C (4 copies), arsenic efflux pump ars B (1 copy), ars R transcriptional repressor (1 copy), arsenical resistance ars H (2 copies), ACR3 efflux pump (2 copies), and no copies for arsenite-oxidase ( aox / aos operon) were noted in strain KAs 3-5 T , which highlighted the mechanism of As 5+ reduction through arsenic detoxification by As extrusion out of the cells instead of oxidation [ 92–94 ]. Moreover, a copy of ArsH (organoarsenical oxidase) that confers resistance to trivalent forms of organoarsenic compounds is also identified. The expression of these genes seems to be regulated by two ArsR family transcriptional regulators, where one of them is clustered with the ArsH, ArsC, ArsB, and ACR3 forming the Ars operon. Similarity search of all the ars C gene sequences against Achromobacter type members showed that 3 copies ( ars C1, ars C3, ars C4) were highly identical (96–99%) to the ars C thioredoxin-like superfamily [glutaredoxin (GRX)] of Achromobacter xylosoxidans A8 and Achromobacter sp. MFA1 and the ars C2 was found to be similar (99%) with E. coli members. The inter sequence similarity among all ars C was quite low ( ars C1: ars C2; 28%, ars C1: ars C3; 33%, ars C1: ars C4; 61%, ars C2: ars C3; 20%, ars C2: ars C4; 27%, ars C3: ars C4; no match). Similar observations were noted by us for the phylogenetically related strains A. arsenitoxydans SY8 and A. xylosoxidans A8. The other ars genes ( ars H, ars B, ars R) and ACR3 were found to have highest homologs within Achromobacter or Alcaligenaceae members. All the ars genes showed typical of 59.8–61.0% GC content, close to the genomic GC range of the Achromobacter members, except ars C2 with 56.7 mol%, which indicated its possible horizontal acquaintance. Many gram-negative proteobacterial type members ( Herminimonas arsenicoxydans , Campylobacter jejuni RM1221, Microbacterium sp. A33, Thiomonas sp. 3As) from As-impacted habitat found to possess such ars operon for As-transformation and regulation [ 11 , 90 ]. It is also observed that single organism possesses similar multiple ars cluster (3–4 numbers) and the same has been observed in many bacterial strains viz. H. arsenicoxydans and Anabaena sp. PCC7120, and Pseudomonas putida KT2440, that confers greater tolerance to As at wider environmental conditions [ 73 , 89 , 95 , 96 ].The phylogenetic reconstruction of multi copy ars C gene of compared Achromobacter through neighborNet algorithm (distance matrix enabled) showed a tri-partite dispersed neighbour network, where ars C copies of A. insolitus were found to be conserved (with long distance clade) among all ( Fig. 5 ). A marked phylogenetic congruency between ars C gene and 16S rRNA gene phylogeny was observed, where A. arsenitoxydans SY8 and A. xylosoxidans A8 are inferred to be the nearest phylogenetic neighbours. Recently, many of the groundwater bacteria of Betaproteobacteria ( Comamonas sp., Acidovorax sp. BA3, Variovorax sp. BI2, Delftia sp. BA2, Achromobacter sp.) has shown to harbour ars based detoxification clusters [ 8–10 ]. Paul et al., [ 5 ] isolated 170 strains from As-rich groundwater (As of 0.01–1.37 mg/L) of West Bengal, India belonging to Proteobacteria , Actinobacteria and Firmicutes . Under anaerobic conditions 50% of the strains were able to reduce As 5+ while metabolizing sugar acids (lactate, acetate, etc.) as well as hydrocarbons, endowed with ars C, and ars B. Hence the ability of anaerobic As reduction by these groundwater isolates is justified considering their long term association with the soluble As within the As-contaminated groundwater environment.
With respect to organic matter utilization by strain KAs 3-5 T , a total of 166 subsystems (by RAST) were assigned to degradation of aromatic compounds and 148 putative CAZymes for carbon source utilization. The strain showed genes for metabolism of aromatics ( n = 39), central aromatic intermediates ( n = 99), and peripheral pathways for aromatics catabolism ( n = 28), while no genes were detected for aliphatic hydrocarbons utilization. A complete pathway for benzoate uptake-transportation and its subsequent mineralization to acetyl-CoA leading to tri-carboxylic acid (TCA) cycle was noted. The complete operon for gentisate and homogentisate degradation was observed, which was flanked by genes encoding putative ABC transporters of benzoate. Bacterial metabolism of aromatics preferentially proceeds through dihydroxylated intermediates (catechol and protocatechuate) and further degraded via the intradiol (ortho) or extradiol (meta) ring cleavage [ 97 ]. The genes for resulting ortho-pathway (acetyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA) or β-ketoadipate pathway ultimately leading to the TCA cycle were noticed in strain KAs 3-5 T [ 98 ]. The detailed metabolic pathways for aromatics degradation in strain KAs 3-5 T is presented in Fig. 6 . The catechol branch of the β-ketoadipate pathway is comparatively intact than the protocatechuate branch in strain KAs 3-5 T . In the upper-stream of catechol, ben A (benzoate/toluate 1,2-dioxygenase subunit) and ben C (benzoate/toluate 1,2- dioxygenase reductase) were identified, indicating the transformation of benzoate into benzoate diol, which is further metabolized to catechol. Similarity search of those genes showed closest homologs from Achromobacter members mostly of A. denitrificans , A. xylosoxidans , and Achromobacter sp. root. So far, Achromobacter strains capable of degrading aromatic compounds have been reported from various environments and similar to strain KAs 3-5 T , Achromobacter sp. DMS1, A. xylosoxidans KF701, A. xylosoxidans A8, T7, and DN002 possesses many catechol metabolism genes (dioxygenases) [ 38 , 39 , 99 ]. Salicylate hydroxylase, a key enzyme in naphthalene catabolism was found to be encoded by strain KAs 3-5 T generating catechol, H 2 O, and CO 2 [ 100 ] with naphthalene or biphenyl dioxygenase. Similar mechanisms have been reported to be involved in naphthalene mineralization by Pseudomonas putida by converting salicyl aldehyde to salicylate and converting its by-products to TCA cycle intermediates [ 11 , 101 ]. Genes for aromatic ring opening dioxygenase and p -hydroxybenzoate monooxygenase are also found to be involved in aromatics utilization. Many of the Glutathione S-transferase (GST) for PAHs degradation [ 102 ] was noted in strain KAs 3-5 T . In addition, 120 genes in strain KAs 3-5 T were assigned to “xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism” using KAAS annotation, such as genes related to the degradation of fluorobenzoate, toluene, and xylene. For carbon source, 50 glycoside hydrolases (GHs), 23 glycosyltransferases (GTs), 34 carbohydrate esterases (CEs), 14 lyases (PL), 8 auxiliary activities (AAs), and 19 carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs) were detected. The strain Cont-1 found to harbour genes for metabolism of spectrum of sugars viz. glucose, lactose, galactose, trehalose, maltose, raffinose, N -acetylglucosamine, and glucosides, and genetic determinants for converting sugar-alcohols (glycerol and sorbitol) to glycolytic intermediates, and its subsequent conversion (by pyruvate dehydrogenase, pyruvate formate-lyase, phosphotransacetylase, acetate kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, acetyl-coA-acetyltransferase) to various fermentation products. Several genes encoding LysR, GntR, and MarR family transcriptional regulators related to aromatic degradation and sugar metabolism were also identified. Dominance of such substrate utilization abilities is highly correlated to the availability of the labile organic carbons [mostly of sedimentary, geogenic (microbial/plant/geothermal activities or organically buried peat layers) or surface derived labile sources] in the oligotrophic groundwater environment and oxido-reductive transformation of As or Fe, in the Bengal groundwater [ 7 , 11 ].
Genes related to elemental cycling and niche adaptation by strain KAs 3-5T In order to gain insight into the molecular basis of survival of the strain KAs 3-5 T in oligotrophic As-rich groundwater, genes related to elemental cycling were investigated. The strain KAs 3-5 T harbors nitrogen regulation proteins NtrY, two copies of P II (signal transduction for N assimilation), N-specific PTS system (PtsN), and many copies of NR (I), required for N regulation and sensing w.r.t to N fluctuation in the aquifer ecosystem [ 103 ], while ammonia assimilation is mediated by glutamine synthetase, glutamate synthase, and glutamine amidotransferases. Denitrification by bacteria constitutes the major contributor of global nitrogen cycle operated in many sub-surface aquifer environments. A complete pathway of denitrification (NO 3 − to NO 2 − to NO to N 2 O to N 2, nar / nap ) was detected in the genome of strain KAs 3-5 T as well as other members like A. arsenitoxydans SY8, A. denitrificans 6241, as Achromobacter members are reported for efficient denitrification. For P/PO 4 3− acquisition and metabolism, strain KAs 3-5 T possesses putative phosphatases, aryldialkyl phosphatases, required for hydrolysis of dissolved organic phosphorus [ 104 ]. Exopolyphosphatase, NADH pyrophosphatases, and Na-dependent PO 4 2− transporter in the genome may play role in sensing and responding to external P levels and cell signalling. Although the ABC-type sulfate transporter is missing in KAs 3-5 T , it encodes sulphate permease (3 copies), sulphate transport system ( cys W), all of which could serve as S-transportation as well as genes for organic alkane sulfonate assimilation. The strain also codes for putative sulphite reductase and sulphite oxido-reductase, NADPH-dependent sulphite reductase for sulphite and thiosulfate assimilation. For Fe acquisition and storage, the strain was found to encode uptake system for Fe through TonB-dependent siderophore receptor, hydroxycarboxylate type achromobactin siderophore for Fe-chelation, ABC-type iron transporter, ferric uptake regulation protein (FUR), ferrichrome iron receptor, periplasmic Fe-binding protein, and putative Fe-reductases (FeR), indicating the strain's intrinsic ability towards mobilization of Fe, that might couple As transformation within groundwater. Like other oligotrophic bacteria, strain KAs 3-5 T encodes Na + pump, the Na + -translocating NADH/ubiquinone oxido-reductase, Na + /H + antiporters for sodium ion gradient used for nutrient uptake [ 56 ]. In addition to these, strain KAs 3-5 T also harbours proteins for Na + dependent antiport and symport of nutrients (Na + -phosphate symporter, Na + − nucleoside permease, Na + /K + /Ca 2+ exchanger, Na + -bile acid transporter, and proton/Na + -glutamate symporter), Na + pump, and Na + -translocating NADH/ubiquinone oxidoreductase, required for regulation of Na + and Cl − for competitive nutrient acquisition and osmolarity stress [ 105 ].
Materials and methods Bacterial strain and culture conditions A facultative anaerobic bacterium; Achromobacter sp. KAs 3-5 T (JCM 31426 T = MTCC 12117 T = MCC 2980 T ) was originally isolated from an As-contaminated groundwater of West Bengal [ 9 ], India. Strain KAs 3-5 T was found to utilize various sugars, sugar acids, aromatic hydrocarbon substrates and transform As 5+ during its facultative anaerobic growth [ 45 ]. The strain was routinely sub-cultured and maintained on Reasoner's 2A (R2A) or artificial groundwater medium (AGM) [composition: g/L −1 ; NaCl; 0.85, KCl; 0.1, MgCl 2 .6H 2 O; 0.05, CaCl 2 .2H 2 O; 0.45, MgSO 4 ; 0.02, KH 2 PO 4 ; 0.03, K 2 HPO 4 ;0.03, NaHCO 3 ; 0.5, pH 6.8 adjusted with 1 N HCl] supplemented with lactate (10 mM, v /v) as carbon source.
Arsenic transformation by strain KAs 3-5T The test for As-transformation (As 5+ , 2 mM as sodium arsenate) by strain KAs 3-5 T was undertaken in AGM medium under anaerobic condition by amending sugar (glucose, 10 mM), sugar acid (lactate, 10 mM), and aromatic compounds (benzene and naphthalene, each 10 mM) as sole carbon sources. Growth was assayed in serum vials (120 mL) with L-Cys-HCl (0.5 g L −1 ) for creating reducing conditions; vials were crimp sealed keeping 30% ( v /v) head space with filtered N 2 gas and autoclaved. Resazurin (0.01%, v/v) was used as redox indicator for monitoring the maintenance of reducing environment within the vials. Bacterial growth was monitored periodically by taking optical density (OD) at 600 nm with a UV-VIS spectrophotometer (Cary 50, Varian). Transformation of As 5+ was assayed by measuring the concentration of As 5+ and As 3+ within the growth medium at regular interval by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) (Varian 810 ICP-MS System). The rate of As-transformation was calculated as the ratio of total As 5+ reduced to the total number of cells in log phase/h/cell. Concentrations of glucose was estimated by phenol‑sulfuric acid method [ 106 ], whereas lactate, benzene, and naphthalene was measured by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using reverse phase C18 column, with appropriate eluent [acetonitrile: water (80:20) for benzene and naphthalene, and 0.2 mM phosphate buffer (acidified to pH 2.5) for lactate], flow rate of 0.5 mL/min, at 210/254 nm (UV detector). For visualization of the structural changes of the cells of strain KAs 3-5 T , scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of the As-grown cells was performed. Briefly, cells from the logarithmic phase of growth (10 8 –10 9 cells/ mL) were harvested, washed thrice with PBS (1 X), finally resuspended in 1 mL of PBS (1 X), fixed using 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 2% formaldehyde, and kept for 6 h at 4 °C. The cells were thin sectioned and embedded into the poly-resin matrix and the microscopic imaging were performed in a transmission electron microscope (FEI Philips Morgagni 268D) at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India. In order to confirm the intracellular As-uptake and -accumulation, energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) of the cellular ultrastructures were performed using EDX analyzer (Oxford Instruments) in conjunction with SEM and TEM microscope. The cell surface charges (as a measure of surface hydrophobicity) of the bacterial cells were measured by harvesting cells from growth incubations (log phase), re-suspended in saline solution (0.85%, w / v ), and subjected for zeta-potential measurement through dynamic light scattering (DLS) method using Nano C (Beckman Coulter). All experiments were done in triplicate and the mean was quoted as sample value.
Protein isolation and 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-D GE) In order to understand the gene expression profile (at protein synthesis level) during cellular interaction with As coupled with organic carbon utilization, a proteomic study was undertaken. The proteomic response of strain KAs 3-5 T was evaluated under two conditions; a) cells growing in AGM without As but with carbon sources (lactate + naphthalene) and b) cells growing in AGM with 2 mM As 5+ (As amended) with carbon sources. For protein isolation, cells from the mid-logarithmic phases (42 h) were harvested by centrifugation (10,000 × g , 10 min, 4 °C), washed twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.2), re-suspended in 10 mL re-suspension buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM DTT, 2% CHAPS, 1% protease inhibitor mix, 1% nuclease mix), and sonicated (50% amplitude, 5 s on, 15 s off cycle for 5 min) at 4 °C. The cell lysate was centrifuged (14,000 × g , 30 min, 4 °C) to remove the cell debris and the supernatant obtained was subjected to protein precipitation with double volume of chilled acetone at −20 °C overnight. The precipitate was obtained by centrifugation (12,000 × g , 30 min, 4 °C), washed twice with ice cold acetone, air dried and solubilized in 500 μL rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM DTT, 2% CHAPS, 2% triton X-100 and 0.25% ampholyte). Protein purification and quantification was performed using a 2-D Clean-Up kit (GE Healthcare), and 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) as per manufacturer's instructions. For the first dimension, the IPG strips (7 cm, pH 3–10) were passively rehydrated overnight with 250 μL sample volume (total 100 μg protein), and focused using Protean i12 IEF Cell (Biorad) at 20 °C following the program: 250 V for 0.5 h (linear), 4000 V for 2.5 h (linear), 9000 Vh (rapid), hold at 500 V (linear) for 5 h. The focused strips were incubated for 15 min in equilibration buffer I (6 M urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS, 0.002% bromophenol blue and 1% DTT in 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer pH 8.8) followed by equilibration buffer II (6 M urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS, 0.002% bromophenol blue and 2.5% iodoacetamide in 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer pH 8.8). Subsequently, the strips were loaded onto the second dimension having 12% resolving SDS-PAGE gels. Electrophoresis was performed at 25 mA constant current for 6 h. Protein spots were visualized by staining with coomassie brilliant blue R-250 (CBB). The stained gels were scanned using a GS-800 calibrated densitometer (Biorad). The differential expression patterns (relative spot volume %) were studied using PDQuest software version 7.1 (Bio-Rad). Spots showing differential fold changes (> 1.2 fold) were selected and subjected to trypsin in-gel digestion and peptide extraction [ 70 ]. The peptides were mixed with MALDI matrix solution (α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid +0.1% TFA), spotted onto MALDI target plate, and subjected to MALDI-TOF/MS (Bruker Daltonics) for mass spectrometric identification. Data acquisition (5000 laser shots) and analysis were performed using flex control (AlphaFlextreme, Bruker) on a positive reflector mode. The spectra were processed for advanced base line correction, noise removal and mass calibration. The mass spectra search settings were maximum one missed trypsin cleavage, peptide mass tolerance of ±100 ppm, monoisotopic mass, alkylation of cysteine by carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The mass lists were entered in the MASCOT search engine ( http://www.matrixscience.com ) and protein identifications were performed by searching against the NCBI nr database ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov /).
Genome sequencing and functional annotation The genomic DNA of strain KAs 3-5 T was isolated using Purelink™ genomic DNA mini kit (Invitrogen) following manufacturer's protocol. The quality and quantity of DNA was examined using a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific) and a Qubit Fluorometer (Applied Biosystem). A total of 100 ng of high quality DNA was subjected for successive step of sequencing. The sequencing library was prepared using the Ion Xpress™ Plus Fragment Library Kit, followed by clonal amplification of the library on the Ion One Touch System (template preparation) and was loaded onto Ion 530™ chip for sequencing using 400 bp Ion chemistry. Sequencing was performed using the Ion S5 (Ion Torrent) platform in the in-house next-generation sequencing (NGS) facility at Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. A total of 367,521,182 bases (> Q20) merging to 1, 269,178 single-end reads (mean length 333 bp) were generated following quality filtration, trimming, and adapter removal yielding a 76× coverage of the genome. The whole genome was de-novo assembled using SPAdes assembler (version 3.10.1) to form contigs, and contigs lesser than 200 bp were removed. The draft genome was submitted to NCBI GenBank for accession. Based on the genomic relatedness (blastn analysis, E -value >1e-6; identity >70%; coverage >50%) of strain KAs 3-5 T with Achromobacter members, whole genomes of the top-hit Achromobacter type and non-type members ( A. arsenitoxydans SY8, A. xylosoxidans A8, A. xylosoxidans C54, A. xylosoxidans NBRC, A. spanius CGMCC 9173, A. denitrificans nbrc 15125, A. ruhlandii 6241, and A. insolitus DSM 23807, A. piechaudii ATCC 43553 , and Achromobacter sp. root 170) were retrieved from NCBI Genome browser for comparative genome analysis. Functional predictions of the protein-encoding genes (PEGs) were performed through Rapid Annotation Subsystem Technology (RAST) server ( https://rast.nmpdr.org /), Integrated Microbial Genome (IMG) ( http://img.jgi.doe.gov ), and PATRIC web server. Predictions of the tRNAs and rRNAs were performed by tRNAScan-SE 2.0 server ( http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/tRNAscan-SE/ ) and RNAmmer 1.2 server ( http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/RNAmmer/ ). The metabolic and physiological function was predicted through MAPLE version 2.3.0 with bidirectional best-hit ( http://www.genome.jp/tools/maple ). Prophage and deviation in the chromosomal GC content (as Genomic Islands; GIs) were predicted through PHAST and Island Viewer3 ( http://www.pathogenomics.sfu.ca/islandviewer/ ), respectively.
Phylogenomics of strain KAs 3-5T The nucleotide sequences coding for 16S rRNA were obtained from the genomic contigs and subjected to similarity search in NCBI BLAST, and against validly described members of the EzTaxon-e server ( http://www.ezbiocloud.net/eztaxon ). Multiple alignments of 16S rRNA gene sequences of Achromobacter members were performed using the CLUSTAL W of the MEGA software (version 7.0 [ 107 ]. All ambiguous positions were removed in the final dataset and phylogenetic reconstructions were performed using neighbour-joining (NJ) method [ 108 ] based on 1000 bootstrap replications using Jukes-Cantor distance model. Since, 16S rRNA gene is multi-copy and Achromobacter members share high levels of similarity to one another, the gene could not be used for species differentiation [ 84 ]. Hence multi locus sequence analysis (MLSA) involving single copy genes was performed for species level comparison among closely related strains. The 31 conserved bacterial single copy genes ( dna G, frr , inf C, nus A, pgk , pyr G, rpl ABCDEFKLMNPST, rpm A, rpo B, rps BCEIJKMS, smp B, and tsf ) were extracted from each genome using AmphoraNet server ( https://pitgroup.org/amphoranet/ ), aligned through CLUSTAL W, concatenated, and robust phylogeny was deciphered through neighbour-joining (NJ) method involving Jones–Thornton–Taylor (JTT) matrix with 1000 bootstrap revaluation. Species identification was also performed using ribosomal MLST (rMLST) ( https://pubmlst.org/rmlst/ ). For other phylogenomic analysis, average nucleotide identity (ANI, Ortho ANI), average amino acid identity (AAI), and digitalDNA-DNA hybridization (dDDH) were calculated using OAT software [ 109 ]. In addition, MALDI-TOF spectrum based taxonomic characterization of strain KAs 3-5 T and closest taxonomic neighbours ( A. xylosoxydans A8, A. mucicolens LMG 26658, and A. spanius LMG 59111) was performed to delineate the species level differences. For MALDI-TOF based spectrum, whole cell proteins were extracted following ethanol-formic acid (FA) extraction method [ 110 ], mixed with MALDI matrix solution (2, 5-dihydroxybenzoic acid in 20% acetonitrile and 1% TFA) in 1:2 ( v /v) ratios, and spotted onto MALDI target plate. MALDI-TOF/MS measurements were carried out using an AlphafleXtreme instrument (Bruker Daltonics) operated at 10-Hz laser frequency, 20-kV acceleration voltage, 18.5-kV IS2 voltage, in linear positive mode with mass spectra accumulation in the range 2–20 kDa with 500 laser shots (a total of 5000 shots). Optimal parameter settings for smoothing, baseline correction, and peak detection were done with the reference spectra obtained for internal standard (Bruker). The MALDI spectrums obtained were compared for differentiating the species members.
Pan-genomic and functional genomic analysis For determining Achromobacter genomic diversity, pan-genomics was performed through Bacterial Pan-Genomes Analysis Pipeline (BPGA; [ 111 ]) and PanGP [ 112 ]. The pan-genomic CDS ( E -value cut-off 1e-5 and coverage ≥50%) were clustered into orthologous families by cluster tool MCL for COG annotation. The core genes (translated amino acid sequences) of Achromobacter were extracted through PanGP and subjected to phylogenetic reconstruction using neighbour-joining method involving Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT) matrix through MEGA 7.0. Unique genes (singletons) of the strain KAs 3-5 T were searched for functional annotation through Blast2Go pipeline. The genes responsible for As-transformation, hydrocarbon utilization, and other niche specific properties were obtained from RAST annotation files and searched for similarity level in BLASTN. The corresponding nucleotides were translated to amino acids in ExPasy tool ( https://web.expasy.org/translate/ ) with appropriate open reading frames (ORFs) and searched in BLASTP (nr database), conserved domain database (CDD) and phylogeny was inferred through neighbour-joining method involving Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT) matrix in MEGA 7.0. The phylogenetic neighbour networks of the genes were reconstructed using SplitsTree involving Neighbornet and split decomposition methods [ 37 ].
GenBank accession number of the whole genome sequence The whole-genome shotgun sequencing project of strain KAs 3-5 T has been deposited at DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank under the accession no. MQNQ00000000. The version described in this paper is the 2nd version MQNQ02000000 with Bioproject ID: PRJNA352521, BioSample ID: SAMN05981820.
Conclusion The present study is the first report on the whole genome sequencing, functional genomic attributes and proteomic response of As-transforming groundwater bacterium Achromobacter sp. KAs 3-5 T from As-contaminated groundwater of Bengal Basin, India. The genomic inventories highlighted the remarkable properties of As-transformation, organic matter (aromatic hydrocarbon and sugar) utilization, Fe-uptake and transport, as well as denitrification by the bacterium, which makes it a key representative bacterium for geo-microbiological studies. Proteomics based identification of proteins that are induced or suppressed confirmed the functional As 5+ reductive and resistance pathways as well as aromatics utilization mechanisms in strain KAs 3-5 T . Phylogenomic study established the strain KAs 3-5 T to be a novel environmental representative within the genus Achromobacter . Pan-genomics and comparative genomics involving strain KAs 3-5 T and other Achromobacter members suggested a nearly open pan genomic size, with possible chance of horizontal gene transfer events and provided new insights into Achromobacter species ubiquity towards varied environment. The strains' unique genes for metal transport, transcriptional regulation, xenobiotics degradation, membrane transport, efflux pumps, and hypothetical proteins provided the basis for the intrinsic metabolic versatility required to survive in oligotrophic, As-rich aquifer environment.