https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2019.03.049
Title: Prediction of new vaccine targets in the core genome of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis through omics approaches and reverse vaccinology
Abstract: Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis is the etiologic agent of veterinary relevance diseases, such as caseous lymphadenitis, affecting different animal species causing damage to the global agribusiness. So far, there are no completely effective treatment methods to overcome the impacts caused by this pathogen. Several genomes of the species are deposited on public databases, allowing the execution of studies related to the pan-genomic approach. In this study, we used an integrated
in silico workflow to prospect novel putative targets using the core genome, a set of shared genes among 65
C. pseudotuberculosis strains. Subsequently, through RNA-Seq data of the same abiotic stresses in two strains, we selected only induced genes to compose the reverse vaccinology workflow based in two different strategies. Our results predicted six probable antigens in both analysis, which indicates that they have a strong potential to be used in further studies as vaccine targets against this bacterium.
Introduction Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis is a Gram-positive, pleomorphic, facultative intracellular, β-hemolytic bacterium and the etiologic agent of diseases with zoonotic relevance. Among them, caseous lymphadenitis, ulcerative lymphangitis, mastitis, and ulcerative dermatitis ( Chirino-Zárraga et al., 2006 ; Dorella et al., 2006 ). These pathologies affect several animal species, such as goats, sheep, buffaloes, cattle, horses, and llamas, causing economic losses to producers worldwide ( Al-Gaabary et al., 2009 ; Çetinkaya et al., 2002 ). Studies have reported strains isolated in different parts of the world, but the species is more prevalent in regions, such as in Asian, Arab, and African countries, as well as Oceania, North America, and Latin America ( Radusky et al., 2015 ). This species is divided according to the capacity of the isolates to catalyze the reduction of nitrate ( Barakat et al., 1984 ). Biovar ovis (type I), nitrate-reductase negative, affects mainly small ruminants ( Abebe and Sisay Tessema, 2015 ), and the biovar equi (type II), nitrate-reductase positive, affects horses ( Baraúna et al., 2017 ).
In the infectious process of C. pseudotuberculosis , primary immune responses are mediated by cytokines and secondary responses can occur through multiple pathways. Major histocompatibility class II (MHC II) complexes and several subpopulations of lymphocytes organized in three regions were identified within the encapsulated lesions, which shows that recruitment of defense cells is a characteristic of caseous lymphadenitis, the major disease related to the bacteria ( Ellis et al., 1991 ; Walker et al., 1991 ).
After phagocytosis, the phagosome rapidly becomes acid, which negatively affects the metabolism of the pathogen, causing damages in its macromolecules. In addition, other types of intracellular stresses affect the bacterium, including oxidative, thermal and nitrosative shocks, as well as surface and osmotic stresses ( Pinto et al., 2014 ). However, the pathogen can survive within macrophages, and this capacity is essential for the migration of C. pseudotuberculosis from the place where the initial infection occurred to internal lymph nodes and other tissues. Once the barriers caused by abiotic stresses have been circumvented as a protective mechanism of the immune system, the bacterium establishes itself in the host causing the chronic infections that persist throughout the life of the animal ( Baird and Fontaine, 2007 ).
Due to the importance of this pathogen, several genomes of the species were sequenced in the last decade, where, this large amount of data stimulated the development of studies related to comparative genomics, especially the pan-genome, which is composed of three parts: core genome, accessory genome and strain-specific genes ( Tettelin et al., 2005 ). The core genome is composed of genes that are shared by all the strains analyzed in the study. Usually, the core genes encode products that are responsible for basic aspects of the life of the organism, such as processes of replication, transcription, translation and maintenance of cellular homeostasis, making them suitable targets to prospect vaccine and therapeutic molecules ( Guimarães et al., 2015 ; Medini et al., 2005 ).
The pan-genomic approach has been used to identify the gene repertoire in several bacterial pathogens, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae , Escherichia coli , Salmonella enterica , and Helicobacter pylori ( Donati et al., 2010 ; Gordienko et al., 2013 ; Jacobsen et al., 2011 ; Uchiyama et al., 2016 ). Regarding C. pseudotuberculosis , a pioneer work investigated the pan-genome of four strains available until then on NCBI database, in addition, to characterize the genomic map of the microorganism ( Ruiz et al., 2011 ). Subsequently, Soares et al. (2013a) used the pan-genomic and phylogenetic approaches to study 15 isolates of the microorganism. Their results have shown the close relationship between pathogenic corynebacteria and the evidence of clonal-like behavior among isolates of C. pseudotuberculosis , especially among strains of biovar ovis ( Soares et al., 2013a ).
Also, transcriptomic studies using this bacterium as a model organism were performed. The expression profile of genes in strain 1002, biovar ovis , was evaluated under three stress conditions: thermal stress, where the bacteria were incubated at 50 °C; acidic stress, where they were submitted in culture medium supplemented with hydrochloric acid, and osmotic stress, where the incubation was done in medium with sodium chloride 2 M ( Pinto et al., 2012, 2014 ). Recently, two studies about the 258 strain, biovar equi , were performed using the same three conditions previous described in strain 1002 ( Gomide et al., 2018a, 2018b ).
Despite its veterinary importance, there are no completely efficient therapeutic methods to treat the diseases caused by C. pseudotuberculosis . Some vaccines are available, in general, based on the use of formalin-inactivated culture supernatants, rich in phospholipase D. However, the protection levels vary as well as the efficiency, depending on the host. They are also not available in all countries and have collateral effects, which reaffirms the need for the search for new solutions ( Santana-Jorge et al., 2016 ).
In order to find new molecules for the production of vaccines, a strategy that has been widely used is reverse vaccinology (RV), which consists in a screening of the pathogen genome applying in silico pipelines to explore and find non-conventional antigens ( Rappuoli, 2000 ). RV was first used in Neisseria meningitidis group B, and more recently, this approach has included comparative genomic analysis to identify conserved and non-host homologs antigens ( Kanampalliwar et al., 2013 ; Pizza et al., 2000 ). Also, transcriptomic and proteomic data can be integrated into the process, reducing time and investment in further analysis ( Sette and Rappuoli, 2010 ).
Thus, considering the lack of effective treatments against the bacterium, this study aims to investigate the repertoire of induced genes shared by several strains of the species using reverse vaccinology, and functional annotation methodologies to prospect novel therapeutic strategies to combat C. pseudotuberculosis .
Materials and methods The workflow used in this work for the prediction of putative vaccine candidates against C. pseudotuberculosis is detailed in Fig. 1 .
Collection of genome data The dataset of the study is composed of 65 complete genomes of C. pseudotuberculosis isolated from 18 countries, in different species of hosts. These genomes were retrieved from NCBI database ( www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome ) in EMBL format. The final dataset comprises 34 strains of biovar ovis and 31 of biovar equi ( Table S1 ).
The dataset of the study is composed of 65 complete genomes of C. pseudotuberculosis isolated from 18 countries, in different species of hosts. These genomes were retrieved from NCBI database ( www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome ) in EMBL format. The final dataset comprises 34 strains of biovar ovis and 31 of biovar equi (Table S1).
Identification of the core genome The common orthologues genes repertoire of the 65 C. pseudotuberculosis strains was defined through the Pan-Genomes Analysis Pipeline (PGAP) ( Zhao et al., 2012 ). This software requires as input files the nucleotide sequences (.nuc), the amino acid sequences (.pep), and the list of the sequences functions of the corresponding genes to be analyzed (.function). These files were generated through Artemis software ( Rutherford et al., 2000 ). We adopted e-value of 0.00001, minimum score of Blastall 40 (default parameter), 80% identity, and 90% coverage. The Gene Family (GF) method was chosen to perform the identification of orthologues genes, since it uses the Blastall results as input of the clustering, through the Markov Cluster (MCL) algorithm.
Retrieval of gene expression data The expression data was obtained from RNA-Seq data of strains 1002, biovar ovis ( Pinto et al., 2014 ) and 258, biovar equi ( Gomide et al., 2018a, 2018b ), that are available on NCBI SRA database ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/ ). Both transcriptome analyses were performed by the SOLiD™ platform and used the same stress conditions: BHI medium supplemented with hydrochloric acid (pH 5), culture with thermal shock (50 °C), BHI supplemented with sodium chloride (2 M), besides the control condition (growth in BHI medium at 37 °C for 48 h). The access numbers for the conditions in each strain are shown in the Table 1 .
Differential transcriptomic profile analysis The identification of expressed genes in the core genome was performed through the protocols of the Tophat ( Kim and Salzberg, 2011 ) and Cufflinks ( Trapnell et al., 2012 ) programs. Tophat maps the reads of each tested condition against an annotated reference genome. Cufflinks then obtain the expression level values of FPKM (Fragments Per Kilobase Of Exon Per Million Fragments Mapped) and identify the expressed genes through Cuffdiff, a tool included in its pipeline. To indicate if the genes have a significant differential expression, this tool is based on the cut-off values of p-value and q-value ≤ 0.05, classifying them as “YES”.
Differentially expressed genes were identified by the cut-off parameter of the fold change value, which is calculated by the ratio of FPKM values between the tested conditions. The genes that showed alteration in expression at least twice in relation to the control condition were classified as induced (fold change ≥2) and repressed (fold change ≤0.5). In this study, we considered only induced genes for further analysis.
Functional annotation of induced genes The core genes induced in at least one condition in one or both 1002 and 258 strains were functionally annotated according to the biological processes, molecular functions and cellular components based on Gene Ontology database through GO FEAT ( Araujo et al., 2018 ), a platform for functional annotation and enrichment of genomic and transcriptomic data based on sequence homology search. GO FEAT also provides cross-references to different databases, such as UniProt, for protein analysis; KEGG, which predicts metabolic pathways; InterPro and Pfam, which predict domains, motifs, and families of proteins. The annotation was performed using a file in FASTA format containing the amino acid sequence of the induced genes and, as parameter to the BLASTp alignment, was used e-value of 0.001.
Computational target selection method The method of Mature Epitopes Density – MED was adopted as an in silico prediction strategy and the computational process was implemented from the MED 1.0 Server ( Santos et al., 2013 ). The MED 1.0 Server integrates in its pipeline the SurfG +, TMHMM and NetMHC software packages. The final output of the analysis consists in a list of exported proteins (secreted or potentially exposed on the bacterial surface) ranked by descending values of MED Score.
The MED score is calculated for each amino acid sequence according to the equation described by Santos et al. (2013) and it represents the predicted epitope concentration per sequence, in nanomolar units per mer (nM/mer). For this work, the selection of default settings for Gram-positive bacteria have taken into account a cell wall measure of 50 amino acids.
Prediction of antigen candidates Homology analysis between the all induced genes, and human and mouse genomes were performed by the Database of Essential Genes – DEG ( Zhang, 2004 ) through BLASTp, using BLOSUM62 matrix, e-value = 0.0001, identity = 35%, and bit score = 100. The non-homologous proteins were selected for further prediction of vaccine targets.
Vaxign pipeline was used to vaccine target prediction which includes subcellular location, adhesion probability, transmembrane domain, sequence similarity to host proteome, sequence conservation among genomes, and epitope binding to MHC class I and class II ( He et al., 2010 ). ProtParam tool ( Gasteiger et al., 2003 ) estimated the molecular weight (MW), and VaxiJen ( Doytchinova and Flower, 2007 ) analyzed the antigen classification of the proteins, based on its physicochemical properties. For antigenicity analysis, we adopted the default parameter value (threshold of 0.4).
Protein-protein interaction network The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins – STRING was used to visualize protein-protein interaction networks of two vaccine candidates, adopting strain E19 as reference genome applying a minimum required interaction score of 0.7 and maximum 10 interactions to show, which indicates a high confidence. STRING calculates the confidence based on the conserved gene neighborhood, gene fusion events and significant co-occurrence of the genes across a specific subset of species ( Szklarczyk et al., 2015 ).
Results Transcriptomic profile of the core genome The pan-genome results showed that the non-redundant gene repertoire of the species contains 7701 clusters of genes, including 4138 singletons; 2795 belong to the accessory genome, and 768 comprise the core genome ( Table S2 ).
The pan-genome results showed that the non-redundant gene repertoire of the species contains 7701 clusters of genes, including 4138 singletons; 2795 belong to the accessory genome, and 768 comprise the core genome (Table S2).
The set of genes shared by all strains was analyzed by their expression levels, based on the transcriptome data of strains 1002 and 258 available on NCBI to identify only those considered induced according to the cutoff parameter. In our results, 230 presented fold change values ≥2 in at least one abiotic stress condition, in one or both strains. The complete list of gene expression analysis is available in Tables S3 (strain 1002) and S4 (strain 258).
The set of genes shared by all strains was analyzed by their expression levels, based on the transcriptome data of strains 1002 and 258 available on NCBI to identify only those considered induced according to the cutoff parameter. In our results, 230 presented fold change values ≥2 in at least one abiotic stress condition, in one or both strains. The complete list of gene expression analysis is available in Tables S3 (strain 1002) and S4 (strain 258).
Functional characteristics of the induced genes A mutifasta file with the 230 genes considered induced was submitted to the functional annotation, and the complete list is showed in Table S5 . Molecular function comprises the elementary activities of a gene product at the molecular level. Biological processes are sets of molecular events with definite beginning and end, pertinent to the physiology of cells ( Ashburner et al., 2000 ). Due to the great number of terms GO generated by GO FEAT platform, we chose only those with the highest number of genes.
A mutifasta file with the 230 genes considered induced was submitted to the functional annotation, and the complete list is showed in Table S5. Molecular function comprises the elementary activities of a gene product at the molecular level. Biological processes are sets of molecular events with definite beginning and end, pertinent to the physiology of cells ( Ashburner et al., 2000 ). Due to the great number of terms GO generated by GO FEAT platform, we chose only those with the highest number of genes.
Most of biological processes and molecular functions of the induced genes in the core genome are related to protein synthesis, transcription and metabolic processes of carbohydrates and other molecules. Proteins involved with binding to ATP and DNA and binding to metals were also predicted. All these components, with no exception, are fundamental for the development of cellular activities of the bacteria ( Fig. 2 ). The products of the core genome, in general, play essential roles to ensure bacterial survival, thus, functional annotation results are in agreement with this property ( Medini et al., 2005 ).
Predicted vaccine targets through RV The first step to create a final list of putative targets was submitting the protein sequences of all induced genes on DEG database to select non-homologous sequences (≤ 35%) in higher organisms, and the results showed that 75 of the sequences have homology according to the percentage of identity ( Table S6 ). A dataset of the 157 remain proteins was used to predict the MHC I and MHC II binding epitopes, subcellular localization, and a number of transmembrane helices (TMHs).
The first step to create a final list of putative targets was submitting the protein sequences of all induced genes on DEG database to select non-homologous sequences (≤ 35%) in higher organisms, and the results showed that 75 of the sequences have homology according to the percentage of identity (Table S6). A dataset of the 157 remain proteins was used to predict the MHC I and MHC II binding epitopes, subcellular localization, and a number of transmembrane helices (TMHs).
In our analyzes, we considered only secreted, putative surface exposed (PSE), and membrane proteins, because they are more favorable to be exposed to the immune cells of the host. Also, we classified proteins containing two or fewer TMHs, whereas they are preferable for further expression analyzes ( Naz et al., 2015 ; Soares et al., 2013b ). Subsequently, we predicted protective antigens and its respective molecular weights (≥ 110 kDa) of the remaining proteins.
MED score results for predicted targets In order to verify our final targets dataset, another method was applied in the prediction of vaccine candidates, called Mature Epitope Density (MED), measured by a MED Score in nanomolar per mer (nM/mer) units ( Santos et al., 2013 ). The pipeline of the MED 1.0 Server includes the SurfG+ 1.0 ( Barinov et al., 2009 ) and TMHMM ( Krogh et al., 2001 ) software packages, which attributes to the candidates a subcellular localization, and then takes into consideration only secreted (SEC) and potentially surface exposed (PSE) proteins for the prediction of antigenic potential. Therefore, only 15% of the proteins moved forward into the process, being 10% and 75% of the others regarded to membrane (MEN) and cytoplasmic (CYT) proteins, respectively ( Fig. 3 ).
Thus, from the previous 230 candidates, only 31 were taken into consideration for MED analysis and further steps ( Fig. 4 ).
In the two different approaches used to the prediction of vaccine targets were found six proteins that are founded in both of them. The main characteristics of these molecule are described in Table 2 .
Protein interaction networks Due to the biological importance of protein-protein interactions in pathogenic organisms, we built the PPI networks of two candidates predicted in RV analysis, which are represented through connections, having their interaction intensity indicated by the thickness and color of lines.
We choose the two networks that presented most interactions. First, the product of the ftsI gene is likely to share a strong relationship with other members of the Fts family, known for their role in cell division process. Also, ftsI showed great interactions with genes of the mur cluster, involved in the synthesis of murein – peptidoglycan – precursors ( Fig. 5 A ) ( Boyle et al., 1997 ; Pilhofer et al., 2008 ).
The network of ndh ( Fig. 5 B), presents great interaction with the menaquinone-cytochrome c reductase complex, an integral membrane enzyme that catalyzes electron transfer from a quinol to a c-type cytochrome and cytochrome pathways ( Yu et al., 1995 ).
Discussion Previous studies already used RV to predict vaccine candidates in C. pseudotuberculosis, adopting different approaches. For instance, the exoproteome of strains 1002 and C231 was compared, and the results showed shared 44 between 93 extracellular proteins ( Pacheco et al., 2011 ). Soares and colleagues described the sequenced genome of strain 258 and performed an in silico pipeline to predict vaccine targets ( Soares et al., 2013b ), and other study used five complete genomes of the species to predict pan-exoproteome. In other words, the common secreted and potentially surface exposed proteins to define the putative vaccine candidates against the pathogen ( Santos et al., 2012 ).
At this point, two genes, ndh , and copC were predicted in previous studies ( Santos et al., 2012 ; Soares et al., 2013b ). Besides these genes, other four – ykuE , mtrB , ftsl and senX3 – were found in both of reverse vaccinology approaches adopted in this work, although with lower values of MED Score. However, the authors of the original work that published the method point out evidences that a low value in MED score does not characterize as enough evidence to disqualify a protein as pathogenic or antigenic ( Santos et al., 2013 ). Although the highest MED score values are strongly related to pathogenic proteins, some of the MED lowest-scored candidates from Mycobacterium tuberculosis genome proved to have evidence for both antigenicity and pathogenicity simultaneously. In that sense, including other tools, such as Vaxign, ProtParam and VaxiJen to the analysis of the antigenic properties of candidates fits as an alternative to rank potential targets in other RV studies.
YkuE is a metal-dependent phosphoesterase that preferentially binds manganese and zinc with the function of catalyzing the hydrolysis reaction. It is a substrate that participates in the twin-arginine protein translocation (Tat) pathway ( Monteferrante et al., 2012 ), which is an important translocation pathway for proteins in a folded state in bacterial species ( Robinson and Bolhuis, 2004 ). Studies performed with B. subtilis have confirmed that the YkuE signal peptide was able to direct the Tat-dependent transporter transport, due to the presence of a twin-arginine (RR) specific signal peptide, lysine, specifically recognized by Tat translocase ( Monteferrante et al., 2012 ; Widdick et al., 2008 ).
The gene mtrB encodes a sensor kinase belonging to the MtrAB system, which is one of the essential two-component regulatory systems (TCRS) for survival in M. tuberculosis . Plocinska and colleagues evidenced that the loss of MtrB, non-essential protein, affects the expression levels of MtrA regulon, cell division, and maintenance of cell form ( Plocinska et al., 2014 ). A study showed that the regulation of MtrA was affected after macrophages infection with Mycobacterium bovis BCG, a nonpathogenic strain. However, when infection was performed with M. tuberculosis , there was no affected expression, concluding that possibly expression and the activity of MtrA could influence the virulence of M. tuberculosis ( Via et al., 1996 ). Another study conducted with the wild-type (WT) MtrA (MtrAWT) demonstrated that overexpression influenced the proliferation of M. tuberculosis after infection. Though, when mtrA and mtrB were overexpressed simultaneously the bacterium returned replication capacity, confirming that MtrB plays a role in regulating MtrA ( Fol et al., 2006 ). Hence, these studies prove that the inactivation of the MtrAB system can influence the virulence activity in pathogenic bacteria.
Penicillin-binding protein 3 (PBP 3), encoded by the ftsI gene, is a transpeptidase essential in cell division process for cross-linking of the septal cell wall and is known as a drug target for β-lactam antibiotics. In Haemophilus influenzae , it was demonstrated that horizontal transfer in this gene can occur intra- or interspecies ( Takahata et al., 2007 ). A knockout mutant for PBP 3 in Pseudomonas aeruginosa caused damages in cell division and increased susceptibility to β-lactams ( Chen et al., 2016 ). This protein also can interact with mtrB to regulate mtrA expression. FtsI activates the MtrB, consequently regulates MtrA, acting as a positive modulator of the MtrAB TCRS. The interaction between these two proteins influences the stability of FtsI located in septa independent of MtrB, and the absence of MtrB compromises the activities of the septal assembly of FtsI and vice versa . In addition, the inactivation of FtsI also compromised the expression of MtrA regulon and that the absence of MtrB increases vancomycin sensitivity and Van-FL staining ability, corroborating with the inactivation of FtsI activity ( Plocinska et al., 2014 ; Sureka et al., 2010 ).
Signal-transduction histidine kinase SenX3 belongs to a two-component system common in many bacterial species, responsible for responding to environmental changes, such as thermal and acidic shocks. The system SenX3-RegX3 has been considered a virulence factor in M. tuberculosis , and plays a role in the regulation of replication and metabolism, in response to oxygen levels ( Singh and Kumar, 2015 ). SenX3-RegX3 is also described as a valuable vaccine target because it is expressed just in specific moments in the mycobacterial growth. Then, knockout strains can survive within the host long enough to elicit an immune response before becoming growth-limited due to the mutation ( Rickman et al., 2004 ).
Besides these, some targets were not predicted in the MED workflow, as the alpha/beta hydrolase family comprises a range of heterogeneous proteins, like aidH , that encodes the N-acylhomoserine lactone (AHL), involved in mechanisms of cellular signaling, especially quorum sensing (QS), between pathogenic bacteria and its respective hosts. QS can be involved in different virulence pathways, as biofilm formation, plasmids transfer, and antibiotic production. Thus, efforts have been made to inactivate AHL in order to prevent and treat infections ( Holmquist, 2000 ; Mei et al., 2010 ).
An arginine/ornithine transport system ATPase also was predicted in our results. Recently, other study used a genome-mining approach in order to prospect proteins as potential vaccine antigens in Moraxella catarrhalis, a human pathogen that causes otitis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In this study, a transporter protein SPB2 is demonstrated as crucial to arginine uptake, and through several, in vitro assays, it was considered as a promising vaccine target ( Otsuka et al., 2015 ).
MgtE belongs to three classes of Mg 2+ transport systems in prokaryotes, being the second most abundant magnesium transport system in both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria ( Maguire, 2006 ). This protein has an important role in the maintenance of the intracellular concentration of Mg 2+ , acting in the detection of magnesium in its cytoplasmic domains blocking the insertion of metals through control of the central channel pore. In addition to the transport function, it could participate in antibiotic-induced cytotoxicity repression in biofilms by inhibiting the type III secretion system (T3SS), a critical virulence factor in Pseudomonas aeruginosa . Studies demonstrated that expression of MgtE results in changes in cytotoxicity, and possibly, formation and biofilm pathogenesis ( Anderson et al., 2008, 2010 ).
The secE gene product, induced under the osmotic and thermal conditions, is a subunit of the Sec-dependent translocase system, a membrane protein that plays an important role in the bacterial protein translocation ( Du Plessis et al., 2011 ; Jeong et al., 1993 ). This gene was also induced in a gene expression study of the virulence factors of Rickettsia rickettsii , the etiological agent of spotted fever, where the isolates were subjected to stress by temperature elevation ( Galletti et al., 2016 ). In Bacillus cereus , protein mutants of the Sec system showed reduced ability to secrete virulence factors efficiently, suggesting that enterotoxins are secreted by this system ( Vörös et al., 2014 ).
The gene thiL encodes thiamine-monophosphate kinase, involved in the vitamin B1 biosynthetic process. Components of thiamine biosynthesis and uptake have been described as part of a strategy of the Gram-positive bacteria Listeria monocytogenes, and probably, other pathogens to proliferate the cytoplasm ( Schauer et al., 2009 ). Besides that, a mutant deletion of gene thiG , also involved in thiamine pathway, is required for the virulence of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae in rice ( Yu et al., 2015 ).
Regarding the screened candidates, a MED analysis of the targets dataset also presented a few new candidates predicted only on this strategy. The combined software packages for subcellular prediction of the MED pipeline found that 35 from the 230 putative targets were eligible as secreted or potentially surface exposed in the membrane, corresponding to the 11 SEC proteins and 24 PSE proteins, according to the MED 1.0 Server prediction pipeline.
The MED Scores value per each candidate are represented in descending order in the Fig. 4 , being the top candidates displayed at the left side of the histogram. The MED Scores found ranged from 14.71 to 0.00 nM/mer, which can be interpreted as a scale from “high antigenic potential” to “low antigenic potential”. Thus, the best scoring candidates were the genes Cp1002_1235 (14.71 nM/mer), Cp1002_1910 (12.61 nM/mer), Cp1002_1302 (9.08 nM/mer), Cp1002_1058 (6.86 nM/mer) and Cp1002_2107 (6.54 nM/mer), therefore, candidates with a higher potential to elicit an immune response.
On this approach, the five top candidates were selected and their respective protein products were investigated – a nitrate reductase; two proteins containing domains of unknown function (DUF), the DUF1707 and the DUF2631; a dihydroxyacetone kinase subunit L; and a membrane protein insertase YidC.
The enzyme nitrate reductase serves as a nutrient for plants and microorganisms, it is used as an electron acceptor by many bacteria and archaea. In this context, several microbial processes use nitrate, such as denitrification and the dissimilatory reduction of nitrate to ammonium. ( Kraft et al., 2011 ).
Domains of unknown function (DUFs) are a large set of uncharacterized families of proteins that are found in the Pfam database ( Bateman et al., 2010 ). The Pfam database is a collection of protein families and domains that has been largely used for annotating sequenced genomes and assembles ( Finn et al., 2014 ). The DUF1707 (08044) is a domain present in a variety of Actinomycetales proteins. Currently, the Pfam database determines that all of the proteins containing this domain are hypothetical and probably membrane bound or associated and, to this day, the function of this domain remains unclear. The same can be said about the DUF2631 (10939), reported as a bacterial family of proteins with unknown function.
Dihydroxyacetone (Dha) kinases are homologous proteins that use different phosphoryl donors, a multiphosphoryl protein of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent carbohydrate-phosphotransferase system in bacteria ( Siebold et al., 2003 ). The Dha kinase of Enterobacteriaceae consists of three subunits, the dihydroxyacetone kinase subunit L (DhaL) and subunit K (DhaK), which are colinear to the ATP-dependent Dha kinases of eukaryotes, and the multiphosphoryl protein DhaM. The DhaL acts antagonistically to the DhaK subunit as coactivator and corepressor, respectively, of the DhaR transcription factor that controls expression of the dhaKLM operon ( Bächler et al., 2005 ). Paralogs of Dha kinases of E. coli occur in association with transcription regulators of the TetR/QacR and the SorC families, pointing to their biological role as sensors in signaling ( Gutknecht et al., 2001 ).
The gene yidC is an essential gene. The YidC protein mediates membrane insertion/assembly of inner membrane proteins, an insertase whose function is related to the folding and insertion of lipoproteins in the plasma membrane ( Petriman et al., 2018 ). The YidC/Oxa1/Alb3 family of membrane proteins function to insert proteins into membranes in bacteria, mitochondria, and chloroplasts ( Chen et al., 2017 ). This protein has been described as periplasmic, exposed on E. coli membrane and stripped of energy resource domains, such as an ATPase ( Ravaud et al., 2008 ). Most likely, YidC catalyzes the transmembrane insertion of newly synthesized membrane proteins using hydrophobic force to promote membrane insertion, by binding nascent chains and facilitating their entrance into the lipid bilayer ( Dalbey et al., 2014 ).
Conclusions This work was the first study to integrate RNA-Seq data of three different abiotic stress conditions and reverse vaccinology in C. pseudotuberculosis . Therefore, we used an extensive in silico workflow to prospect novel proteins to be used as vaccine targets against the bacterium from a common set of genes obtained from 65 genomes through two different RV approaches. According to the differential transcriptome profile, 230 among 768 sequences were pre-selected for functional annotation and RV analysis, which included prediction of subcellular location, number of transmembrane helices, molecular weight, and antigenicity potential and MED analysis.
Through different approaches, we described six potential vaccine targets, which four are not described so far as antigenic candidates, that may be used in further studies as novel vaccine strategies against the pathogen.
The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Table S1 Main features of C. pseudotuberculosis genomes used in the pan-genome analysis. Table S1 Table S2 List of the genes belonging to the core genome of 65 C. pseudotuberculosis strains used in the pan-genome analysis. Table S2 Table S3 Gene expression results of the genes considered induced in 1002 strain. Table S3 Table S4 Gene expression results of the genes considered induced in 258 strain. Table S4 Table S5 Functional annotation of the core genome based on the Gene Ontology database. Table S5 Table S6 Essential genes analysis results through DEG alignment. Table S6
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2019.03.049 .
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior – CAPES ( 88881.068052/2014-01 ) and PROPESP/UFPA .