https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.15005
Genomic analysis unveils important aspects of population structure, virulence, and antimicrobial resistance in Klebsiella aerogenes
Abstract Klebsiella aerogenes is an important pathogen in healthcare-associated infections. Nevertheless, in comparison to other clinically important pathogens, K. aerogenes population structure, genetic diversity, and pathogenicity remain poorly understood. Here, we elucidate K. aerogenes clonal complexes (CCs) and genomic features associated with resistance and virulence. We present a detailed description of the population structure of K. aerogenes based on 97 publicly available genomes by using both multilocus sequence typing and single-nucleotide polymorphisms extracted from the core genome. We also assessed virulence and resistance profiles using Virulence Finder Database and Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database, respectively. We show that K. aerogenes has an open pangenome and a large effective population size, which account for its high genomic diversity and support that negative selection prevents fixation of most deleterious alleles. The population is structured in at least 10 CCs, including two novel ones identified here, CC9 and CC10. The repertoires of resistance genes comprise a high number of antibiotic efflux proteins as well as narrow- and extended-spectrum β-lactamases. Regarding the population structure, we identified two clusters based on virulence profiles because of the presence of the toxin-encoding clb operon and the siderophore production genes, irp and ybt. Notably, CC3 comprises the majority of K. aerogenes isolates associated with hospital outbreaks, emphasizing the importance of constant monitoring of this pathogen. Collectively, our results may provide a foundation for the development of new therapeutic and surveillance strategies worldwide.
Introduction Klebsiella aerogenes is a Gram-negative, motile, and rod-shaped bacterium that belongs to the Enterobacteriales order. It was formerly called as Enterobacter aerogenes according to Hormaeche and Edwards 1960 [1], but phylogenetic analysis showed that this bacterium is more closely related to Klebsiella than to Enterobacter species [2]. Widely considered an opportunistic pathogen, K. aerogenes is associated with nosocomial outbreaks, causing bloodstream, skin and soft tissue, respiratory, and urinary tract infections [3]. The emergence of K. aerogenes strains displaying multidrug resistance (MDR) has been associated with high mortality rates in patients from intensive care units [3].
Antibiotics have been extremely successful in treating several human infections and as a prevention strategy for different clinical interventions [4]. However, the widespread and often inappropriate use of antibiotics accelerate the emergence of resistant bacterial pathogens [5, 6]. Hospital outbreaks have already been related to K. aerogenes isolates carrying extended-spectrum β-lactamase and carbapenemase genes [3, 7], resulting in the adoption of polymyxins as one of the last treatment options [8]. Antimicrobial resistance can also be associated with virulence factors [9], making the genomic analysis of multidrug-resistant microorganisms a valuable tool to help preventing outbreaks, and controlling the spread of multiresistant and virulent strains.
A very effective means of investigating the evolution of a given population is through the characterization of its pangenome, which is the complete repertoire of genes found in several genomes (e.g., of different isolates) of a given species [10]. The pangenome is divided into the core genome, corresponding to genes common to all isolates; the accessory genome, comprising genes present in more than one, but not in all isolates and; the unique (or strain-specific) genome, composed of genes found in a single genome. A pangenome can be defined as open or closed according to the detection of new gene families as additional strains are sequenced, which is a result of the capacity of the species to acquire and use exogenous DNA [2, 11]. The open and closed pangenome concepts have also been linked with sympatric and allopatric lifestyles, respectively [2]. Each subdivision of the pangenome helps elucidate physiological aspects, lifestyle, genetic dynamics, pathogenicity, and population structure of a species [12, 13].
The ability to determine the genetic relatedness between bacterial pathogens is fundamental for epidemiological and evolutionary studies. This process can be facilitated when the desired population structure is defined by techniques such as multilocus sequence typing (MLST), which is available for several species [14]. This technique is based on the analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within housekeeping genes, with each locus receiving a different allele number. Each unique allelic profile (or genotype) is a sequence type (ST), which often defines a clone or strain and can be linked to other STs to form clonal complexes (CCs) [15]. The linkage of STs to form a CC is based on the number of differences between allelic profiles. For example, genotypes differing at only one locus are single-locus variants (SLVs), those with two different loci are double-locus variants (DLVs). It is also possible to determine lineage linkages with core genome MLST (cgMLST), which has greater resolution than classical MLST [16]. The ST and CC information can be used to uncover relationships between closely related isolates, and to elucidate the population distribution across different geographic regions [17], allowing the elaboration of surveillance strategies to prevent the dissemination of specific strains.
The balance between selection and drift plays important roles in shaping bacterial genomes and are often studied by estimating the selection coefficient and the effective population size (Ne) [18, 19]. Because of several technical and biological reasons (e.g., the existence of truly neutral sites in bacterial genomes), it has proven hard to estimate Ne based on neutral expectations [19]. An interesting alternative that has been successfully applied in bacterial genomics is the use of substitution rates at nonsynonymous and synonymous sites (dN/dS) to estimate Ne. Because the dN/dS ratio directly reflects the selection strength [20] and negatively correlates with Ne, it can be useful to understand the evolutionary dynamics of different bacterial populations, including those of clinically important pathogens [21].
Klebsiella aerogenes was included in the ESKAPE group [22, 23] of important pathogens typically associated with antimicrobial resistance. However, in contrast to other ESKAPE species (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa), the pangenome and population structure of K. aerogenes has not been extensively explored. Here, we report a comprehensive comparative genomic analysis of K. aerogenes, which allowed us to uncover important features of its pangenome, selective pressure acting in the species, population structure, resistance, and virulence profiles.
Results and Discussion Genome assembly and prevalence of plasmids and bacteriophages We systematically obtained raw sequencing reads, assembled genomes, and predicted genes of 91 K. aerogenes strains with publicly available data. This dataset was supplemented with six reference genomes (that were not assembled and annotated de novo) (see 2 for details). All the genomes showed at least 95% of genome completeness according to BUSCO [24]. K. aerogenes has an average genome size of 5 281 261 ± 194 500 bp and 4984 ± 219 genes. We found an average %GC of 54.95 ± 0.17 in K. aerogenes, which is within the expected range for Klebsiella [21] (Table S1). Average nucleotide identity (ANI) analysis revealed that all the isolates have over 95% genomic identity, confirming that all the strains belong to the same species.
We inspected the assembled genomes for possible plasmids based on plasmid replicons, identity, and coverage with publicly available plasmid sequences (Table S3). Plasmid replicons or fragments with high identity and coverage were found in 70.1% of the isolates, ranging from 1 to 10 plasmids per strain, with most isolates harboring two plasmids. The most abundant replicon was ColRNAI (Table 1), which is related with plasmids carrying genes encoding toxin–antitoxin system [25]. The second most prevalent plasmids were those with IncF replicons, which are low copy-number plasmids associated with the dissemination of resistance genes, such as blaCTX-M and acc(6′)-Ib-cr [26].
Although abundant in the population, the ColRNAI replicon type showed a low proportion of resistance and virulence genes. Plasmids with the IncA/C2 incompatibility group were found in EA1509, G7, D2, and C10, which are strains associated with hospital outbreaks. These plasmids harbored a high number (i.e., 7–12) of resistance genes (Table 1), but lacked virulence genes. The strain with the highest number of virulence determinants in plasmids (19 genes) was SMART_1248, which was collected from an old male's urine sample from a surveillance study [27]. Isolates with uncharacterized plasmid replicons were also recovered (Table 1). By using the PHASTER database (Table S4), we found a variety of 72 different bacteriophages, with frequencies ranging from 1 to 11 in K. aerogenes genomes. Importantly, we recovered ST-specific phages such as the Enterobacteria phage 933W-like (NC_000924), found in 91.66% of ST4 isolates. It is worth mentioning that this element is often aligned only partially, indicating that many of these fragmented phages are likely nonfunctional.
Pangenome analysis We found that K. aerogenes has an open pangenome with a total of 18 268 gene families (Fig. 1A), indicating a high level of genetic diversity and allowing us to predict that many more additional gene families will be detected as new genomes are sequenced. The open pangenome of K. aerogenes is also in line with its sympatric lifestyle [2]. That is, because of living in communities with a high diversity of microorganisms, it tends to acquire novel genes by horizontal gene transfer (HGT). A previous study estimated the K. aerogenes Ne in 338 041 563.813 [21]. As discussed above, such high Ne is an evidence of strong purifying selection, favoring the retention of numerous accessory genes (including those acquired from HGT) that could ultimately account for the open pangenome of this species.
The K. aerogenes core genome has a total of 3766 genes (Fig. 1A). In other words, 20.61% of the pangenome is associated with intrinsic physiological traits that evolve vertically and under strong purifying selection because of their essentiality [28, 29]. We used 264 006 SNPs found in the core genome to perform a maximum likelihood phylogenetic reconstruction (Fig. 1B), which showed that some clusters are distant from the main part of the population, supporting the intraspecific diversity of K. aerogenes.
In order to estimate the efficiency of selection in K. aerogenes, we calculated πsyn = 0.05 and dN/dS = 0.04, which corroborate previous findings and explain the high Ne discussed above. In fact, dN/dS has been shown to be a robust proxy of Ne [19]. Because the dN/dS is quantitatively different when individuals from the same species are analyzed, the classical signatures of dN/dS < 1 as indicating weak negative selection in divergent populations have a different interpretation in intraspecific studies [20]. According to the ranges determined in a previous study [20], our results indicate that K. aerogenes evolves under strong negative selection.
The accessory genome is composed by medium- and low-frequency genes. A total of 1549 genes were found between 15%, and 94% of the population, and 12 953 genes were present in ≤ 15% of the genomes. The abundance of rare genes further reflects the genome plasticity of K. aerogenes and probably plays roles in niche adaptation and ecological dynamics, in particular because of their localization in genomic islands or plasmids containing transposases and integrases [30, 31]. This finding is also in line with our results presented above on the prevalence of plasmids harboring toxin–antitoxin systems (> 50%), which likely allow K. aerogenes to exploit new niches by increasing its competitiveness, fueling the emergence of new subpopulations.
In addition, we computed the Jaccard distance of the strains by using accessory genes present in between 5% and 95% of the isolates. We used these distances to perform a principal coordinates analysis (PCoA), which allowed the separation of CC3 and CC10 (Fig. 1C). Next, we performed a discriminant analysis of principal components (DAPC) that optimizes variation between groups while minimizing variation within groups [32]. This allowed us to evaluate the contribution of the top 40 genes or orthologous groups, demonstrating that CC9 and CC10 lack genes present in other CCs (Fig. S2). Furthermore, CC9 and CC10 have the greatest number of exclusively present and absent genes (Table 2), indicating that these genes are attractors for the clustering patterns observed in PCoA analysis (Fig. 1C).
Population structure analysis uncovers new K. aerogenes clonal complexes A K. aerogenes MLST scheme was published in December 2017. From the 135 reported STs, 26.6% belong to a known CC. We locally updated this database with 38 new STs and two new CCs, which we named CC9 and CC10 (Table S5). According to our updated MLST analysis of sequenced isolates, at least 10 CCs compose the K. aerogenes population structure (Fig. 2): CC1 (n = 16); CC2 (n = 8); CC3 (n = 33); CC5 (n = 3); CC7 (n = 2); CC8 (n = 1); CC9 (n = 4); CC10 (n = 11). Furthermore, it was not possible to assign a CC to 19 isolates, which were called NOCC. We were unable to recover isolates from CC4 and CC6. Importantly, ANI analysis confirmed the genetic distance of CC9 and CC10 to the other CCs (Fig. S1).
To increase the resolution arising from the use of few genes in the traditional MLST technique, we also used the SNPs from the core genome to infer a cgMLST structure (Fig. 1B). This analysis improved the discriminative power of each CC and allowed us to better define the population structure of K. aerogenes. Importantly, the same population structure was inferred with both methods, supporting the presence of at least 10 CCs.
The most prevalent STs were ST93 and ST4, with ~ 27% and ~ 13% of the isolates, respectively. A large number of STs were singletons, as they had no SLVs or DLVs to form groups (Fig. 2). Importantly, the strains used in our study (Fig. 2, red dots) contributed to a more precise delineation of some CCs (e.g., CC3), emphasizing the need for a constant MLST characterization and ST/CC assignment of new isolates. Finally, upon submission of our manuscript, we have shared the information of the new CCs identified here with the pubMLST database team, and expect that they will be publicly available in the database soon.
In addition to its importance in pathogen surveillance, CC determination is also critical in evolutionary studies. For example, CC3 is the one with the greatest number of isolates and has ST93 as its founder genotype (Fig. 2). The term founder ST derives from population genetics to describe situations where low population diversity gives rise to a genotypically related group. Thus, the founder ST helps understand the evolutionary trajectory of a given CC (Fig. 2). ST155 is the predicted founder of CC10, which has GN04835 as its most basal member (Fig. 1B), being associated with its diversification. This pattern is also observed for the other CCs, allowing a better understanding of the diverse resistance and virulence profiles found in the K. aerogenes population, as we show in the next sections.
Resistance genes and their distribution across K. aerogenes clonal complexes We found a total of 94 and 95 antimicrobial resistance genes in the K. aerogenes core and accessory genomes, respectively; these gene sets were called core and acquired resistome, respectively (Table S6). Regarding the core resistome, we confirmed CMY-108 as the chromosomal constitutive AmpC β-lactamase, whose overexpression leads to cephalosporin resistance [33]. Another core gene conferring resistance against β-lactams is that encoding the outer membrane porin OmpK37, originally associated with lower membrane permeability to the antibiotic in K. pneumoniae [34]. Other core genes were predicted to confer resistance against aminocoumarin, aminoglycosides, macrolides, fosfomycin, fluoroquinolones, sulfonamides, and tetracyclines (Fig. 3C, Table S6).
A range of MDR efflux pumps (e.g., AcrAB-TolC, AcrD, EmrAB-TolC, MacAB-TolC, MdtABC, OqxAB, RosAB) composes the main resistance mechanism encoded by the core resistome (Fig. 3A), potentially conferring resistance against different antibiotic classes, such as fluoroquinolones and macrolides. Indeed, Gram-negative bacterial pathogens exhibit relatively high resistance to macrolides because of the high number of chromosomal-encoded MDR efflux pumps [4]. Furthermore, AcrAB-TolC inactivation by inhibitors induced the susceptibility of K. aerogenes to macrolides [35]. Similarly, the inhibition of some MDR efflux pumps rendered P. aeruginosa susceptible to fluoroquinolones [36]. We hypothesize that the characterization of the intrinsic resistome can aid in the evaluation of new antibiotic targets, and in the identification of potential drug combinations.
In addition to proteins directly involved with resistance, we also identified regulators that control the expression of resistance genes. This gene set includes: BaeRS, the two-component regulatory system associated with the transcriptional activation of MdtABC efflux pumps [37]; the stress sensor MarA that promotes the AcrAB-TolC expression and RarA, a positive regulator of AcrAB and MarA in K. aerogenes [38, 39]; and EmrR, a negative regulator of the EmrAB-TolC efflux pump [40]. These results demonstrate that the inactivation of specific regulatory systems in combination with current antibiotics could produce pleiotropic effects that might increase antibiotic efficacy and even allow the resurrection of obsolete antibiotics.
As opposed to the core resistome, acquired resistance genes are often found to be associated with mobile elements, suggesting their origin via HGT. The main resistance mechanism found in the K. aerogenes acquired resistome involves a large number of antibiotic efflux pumps and enzymes associated with antibiotic inactivation (Fig. 3B). The acquired resistome also comprises major resistance determinants against aminoglycosides [aac(3)-IIa, aac(6′)-Ib, aadA, aph(6′)-Ic, rmtG], β-lactams (blaTEM-1, 24, 215, blaSHV-66, blaOXA-1, 2, 9, 48, blaCTX-M-2, 15, 59, blaCMY-108, blaKPC-1, 3, blaNDM-6 and blaOXY-2-10), diaminopyrimidine (dfrA), fluoroquinolones (qnrB), fosfomycin (fosA), macrolides (rlmA, mphA, chrB), sulfonamide (sul1, sul2), and tetracycline [tet(A/D/G)] (Table S6). By analyzing the frequency of each gene based on antibiotic classes that they confer resistance to (Fig. 4), we found, for example, that CC10 tends to be more resistant against aminoglycosides.
Virulence profiles allow the separation of K. aerogenes strains in two clusters We identified several genes encoding virulence factors in K. aerogenes. Our reference virulence database (see 2 for details) comprises genes involved in biofilm formation, adherence, immune evasion, iron acquisition, allantoin utilization, regulators, secretion systems, serum resistance, and toxin production. More than 70% of the reference genes were detected in at least one K. aerogenes isolate (Table S7). Virulence factors shared by all isolates included the fimA-K operon, involved in adherence to human mucosal or epithelial surfaces [41]; ent, fep, and iro, which encode enterobactin and salmochelin siderophores [42, 43]; rcsAB, regulators of mucoid phenotype A [44], among others (Table S7). We also found intrinsic genes encoding toxins related to K. aerogenes physiology during infection, such as colibactin (ClbD), enterotoxin (SenB), and microcin (MceG and MceH), which could be explored as novel drug targets. On the other hand, virulence factors that were not common for all isolates were highly variable in terms of frequency across genomes (Fig. 6; Table S7).
The evolution of antibiotic resistance and virulence factors is often associated [9, 45]. Thus, we compared the prevalence and distribution of these genes across the whole population (Fig. 5A). Most of the isolates have a low frequency of resistance genes, while virulence factors display a bimodal distribution. When CCs are compared individually, there is a variation between the number of resistance and virulence genes (Fig. 5B). For example, CC3 has a higher number of virulence genes when compared to resistance genes. It is important to note that more than 50% of the CC3 isolates were derived from hospital outbreaks [2, 7, 46-48]. We hypothesize that, because of the sympatric lifestyle of K. aerogenes (i.e., open pangenome), and its occurrence in highly competitive environments, more virulent strains tend to increase in frequency in the population as a strategy to deplete the host resources faster to increase transmission rates, as stated by the trade-off hypothesis [49, 50].
In K. aerogenes, the accessory virulome and resistome are mainly composed of medium- and low-frequency genes, respectively (Fig. S3). Low-frequency genes tend to be encoded in genomic islands or plasmids, which encode several transposases and integrases that promote genetic turnover and diversity [51]. On the other hand, medium-frequency genes can have their proportions shaped by social interactions, as previously proposed [52]. To investigate whether the bimodal distribution of virulence genes (Fig. 5A) was restricted to a specific CC, we built a presence/absence matrix to evaluate virulence profiles. The results indicate a clear separation between less and more virulent strains (Fig. 6), referred here as Cluster A and B, respectively. Cluster B is basically defined by the presence of the clb operon, responsible for the production of colibactin, a genotoxic hybrid polyketide-nonribosomal peptide encoded by psk islands [53] and; ybt and irp, related to the production of yersiniabactin siderophores. Ybt is the most common virulence factor associated with human K. pneumoniae infections [54]. A very recent study also reported the high prevalence of yersiniabactins and colibactin in K. aerogenes ST4 and ST93 [55]. In addition, the most virulent cluster comprises isolates from CC1, CC2, CC3 (all isolates except 44247), and the previously uncharacterized CC10. These findings further highlight the importance of rapid and robust CC identification in the definition of different measures to slow the spread of virulent clones.
Altogether, our results support the capacity to distinguish the virulence profiles between CCs. We determined the population structure of K. aerogenes, including the identification of new STs and CCs. This update in the MLST scheme is useful for epidemiological and evolutionary studies. The next steps to advance the understanding of K. aerogenes could involve a more in-depth study of a greater number of isolates of each CC, as well as the characterization of new STs and CCs. In this context, sequencing samples from a wider range of locations is of great importance. Given the open pangenome and diversity of K. aerogenes isolates, it is expected that several novel STs and CCs will be identified as samples from different countries are sequenced. Our work provides new insights into key biological aspects (e.g., virulence and resistance) of K. aerogenes, as well as some interesting perspectives for the investigation of new drug targets, diagnostic, and surveillance strategies.
Materials and methods Isolates, genome assembly, and gene prediction We conducted this study with 91 isolates of K. aerogenes with whole-genome sequencing reads available on Genbank on December 2017 (Table S1). Sequencing quality was assessed with fastqc version 0.11.5 (https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) and low-quality reads and adaptors removed with trimmomatic 0.35 [56]. Nonreference genomes were assembled using spades 3.11.1 [57] and scaffolds obtained with sspace 3.0 [58]; scaffolds with less than 500 bp were removed. These de novo assembled genomes were supplemented with six reference genomes that were directly used. Genome completeness was assessed with busco 3.0 [24], using Enterobacteriales as a reference dataset. ANI was computed with pyani 0.2.0 [59].
Plasmids were detected with the plasmidSPAdes pipeline [60]. Putative plasmid scaffolds were evaluated using plasmidFinder [61], which contains replicons of several complete plasmids belonging to major incompatibility (Inc) groups of Enterobacteriaceae species. In order to identify plasmids lacking replicon information, we also searched all plasmids of the GenBank database (January 2017) using blastn [62] with 70%, 50%, and 50% of identity, query coverage, and subject coverage thresholds, respectively. ORFs from chromosomal and plasmid sequences were predicted and annotated with prokka 1.12 [63]. Bacteriophage signatures were assessed with phaster [64].
Pangenome analysis and phylogeny The K. aerogenes pangenome was inferred using roary 3.6 [65]. Core genes were defined as those present in more than 95% of the isolates. Core genes present in all isolatees were aligned with mafft v7.271 [66]. SNPs were extracted from the core genome alignment and used for maximum likelihood phylogenetic reconstructions with raxml [67], using the general time reversible (GTR) model and gamma correction specifying the use of only variable sites as input. One thousand bootstrap replicates were generated to assess the significance of internal nodes. Multivariate analysis was performed in R. Jaccard distances were computed by using accessory genes with prevalence between 5% and 95%. These distances were used as input for PCoA. DAPC was evaluated with the adegenet package [68]. The estimations of πsyn and dN/dS were conducted with mega x [69].
MLST analysis To determine the ST of each isolate, the pubMLST database [14] of K. aerogenes was used to identify SNPs in seven housekeeping loci: dnaA, fusA, gyrB, leuS, pryG, rplB, and rpoB. CC identification was performed with eburst [17] to link SLVs and DLVs using 1000 bootstrap resamplings. In addition, to allow a more precise distinction between CCs, we inferred the cgMLST scheme using the core genome SNP phylogenetic tree.
Virulence and antimicrobial resistance genes The repertoire of resistance genes (i.e., the resistome) was inferred using the Comprehensive Antimicrobial Resistance Database (CARD) database (version 1.1.8) [70]. Virulence factors were analyzed using Virulence Factor Database (VFDB; accessed on October 2018) [71], and other virulence factors directly obtained from the literature (Table S2). All predicted proteins were compared with these two databases with blastp [62], by using minimum similarity and query coverage thresholds of 50% and 60%, respectively. Proteins that reached this threshold but were at least twofold longer than the reference sequences were removed. In all methods mentioned in this materials and methods section, default parameters were used unless stated otherwise.