https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbaa013
Toward a high-quality pan-genome landscape of Bacillus subtilis by removal of confounding strains 
Abstract
Pan-genome analysis is widely used to study the evolution and genetic diversity of species, particularly in bacteria. However, the impact of strain selection on the outcome of pan-genome analysis is poorly understood. Furthermore, a standard protocol to ensure high-quality pan-genome results is lacking. In this study, we carried out a series of pan-genome analyses of different strain sets of Bacillus subtilis to understand the impact of various strains on the performance and output quality of pan-genome analyses. Consequently, we found that the results obtained by pan-genome analyses of B. subtilis can be influenced by the inclusion of incorrectly classified Bacillus subspecies strains, phylogenetically distinct strains, engineered genome-reduced strains, chimeric strains, strains with a large number of unique genes or a large proportion of pseudogenes, and multiple clonal strains. Since the presence of these confounding strains can seriously affect the quality and true landscape of the pan-genome, we should remove these deviations in the process of pan-genome analyses. Our study provides new insights into the removal of biases from confounding strains in pan-genome analyses at the beginning of data processing, which enables the achievement of a closer representation of a high-quality pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis that better reflects the performance and credibility of the B. subtilis pan-genome. This procedure could be added as an important quality control step in pan-genome analyses for improving the efficiency of analyses, and ultimately contributing to a better understanding of genome function, evolution and genome-reduction strategies for B. subtilis in the future.
pan-genome analysis, phylogenetic relationship, average nucleotide identity, artificial genome, pan-genome landscape, genome reduction
Issue Section: Problem solving protocol
Introduction
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) enables bacteria to integrate beneficial genes into their genomes, which is critical for bacterial adaption to changing environments [1,2]. Horizontally transferred genes are usually organized into genomic island, an essential component for adapting to various niches [3]. Adaptive evolution of bacteria can be driven by several forces, such as horizontally acquired genes, gene duplication-amplification processes, and interactions among multiple species within communities [4–6]. B. subtilis is commonly used as a model organism to study bacterial chromosome replication and cell differentiation. This species is also used as an industrial bacterium to produce antibiotics, fungicides in alternative medicine, and specific chemicals. Improved maintenance of a stable genome and more efficient gene expression in B. subtilis are critical for driving B. subtilis to produce more target chemicals and reduce waste. Accordingly, designing a reduced genome for B. subtilis has been an active area of research in the fields of synthetic biology and metabolic engineering [7].
So far, many studies have aimed to reduce the size and complexity of the B. subtilis genome. In 2003, Westers et al. [8] knocked out phage-associated regions (prophage1, prophage3, skin, SPβ and PBSX) and operon fragments (pks) in the B. subtilis reference strain 168 genome. Ultimately, this group established strain delta6 (△6), reducing the B. subtilis reference strain 168 genome by 7.7%. This strain did not show significant changes in sporulation, transformation or metabolic flux and only demonstrated slight differences in protein secretion, cell motility and protein expression. In 2007, Ara et al. [9] knocked out other phage regions (prophages 1–6, skin, SPβ, and PBSX) and operon regions (pks and pps) to obtain the genome-reduced strain MGB469, which showed no abnormalities in growth and surprisingly possessed a significant advantage in the expression of foreign recombinant proteins. This group continued to delete fragments from MGB469, finally obtaining strain MG1M, whose genome was reduced by 0.99 Mb, compared with B. subtilis reference strain 168. However, due to the excessive simplification of the genome, it was thought that the deletion of critical genes may have occurred. For instance, this strain displays an irregular shape, slow growth rate and unstable expression of recombinant proteins after subculture. In 2008, Morimoto et al. [10] obtained strain MGB874 from strain MGB469, whose genome was reduced by 0.87 Mb through a multistep reduction method. Compared with the parent strain, its cell morphology and chromosome distribution were normal, but its growth rate was reduced. However, this stain demonstrated increased expression of alkaline cellulose and alkaline protease, which can be a useful trait in factories producing target products. In 2017, Reuß et al. [11] established PS38 by deleting genes in a stepwise manner to form strain delta6 (△6), which possessed a genome that was 36% smaller than the wild B. subtilis reference strain 168. Despite its large-scale deletions, PS38 remained viable, but its growth rate was slightly reduced relative to strain 168. Interestingly, the relative expression of mRNA compared with that of all other RNAs had decreased due to changes in the transcriptional network and resource allocation. Notably, central metabolic pathways were also affected to varying degrees in this strain. Moreover, Li et al. [12] utilized the above and other genome-reduced strains of B. subtilis to produce nucleosides and similarly derived chemicals. However, the development of genome-reduced strains heavily relies on removing prophage and operon regions, and the functions of the deleted gene sets were not well characterized.
‘Pan-genome’ refers to a comprehensive collection of genes from multiple strains of a species. HGT leads to significant diversity in genes possessed by each strain, and pan-genome analyses are widely used to study species evolution and changes in gene function. Pan-genome studies define a set of ‘core genes’ shared by all strains, ‘accessory genes’ shared by two or more strains and ‘unique genes’ that are specific to a certain strain [13, 14]. To eliminate the influence of errors in annotation and genome sequence assembly, the ‘soft core genes’ that are shared by 95% of strains are widely used in pan-genome analyses [15]. The pan-genome can be classified into the open and close pan-genome, which can be used to characterize certain species and which is usually affected by factors such as population size and HGT [16, 17]. With the rapid development of sequencing technology, a variety of strains from different resources and locations have been sequenced. This abundance of sequencing data can be used to understand species evolution, explore gene functions and design the reduction genomes used for producing target chemicals. These large data sets require efficient analysis, and a number of gene sets within species are also required to obtain meaningful results. For instance, understanding the key factors that maintain survival and reproduction in genome-reduced strains relies on establishing a reliable set of core genes. Meanwhile, the pan-genome method can be used to identify different kinds of genes within and between species, as demonstrated through a number of previous studies. Yang et al. studied core genes and accessory genes among 491 E. coli strains by pan-genome analyses and found that highly accurate quorum-sensing (QS) behavior plays an important role in maintaining the harmony between E. coli and its human host [18]. The sequence map of the human pan-genome built by Li et al. identified ~5 Mb of novel DNA sequences that were either individual- or population-specific. Moreover, this group estimated that ∼19–40 Mb of novel sequence information was contained in a complete human pan-genome, which was not identified in the extant reference genome [19]. While it is clear that high-quality pan-genome data sets are required to accurately reflect genetic diversity and identify core genes, there is currently no definitive protocol for obtaining a high-quality pan-genome landscape for a given species or isolate sets.
Until now, several popular tools have been developed to perform pan-genome analysis. These include PanOCT [20], Roary [21], Panseq [22], BPGA [23], PGAP [24] and PanViz [25], and the obtained results of pan-genome can be visualized by R packages, such as FindMyFriends [26] and PanVizGenerator [27]. PanOCT analyzes both gene homology and conserved gene neighborhoods. It is widely used, and it has recently been applied with the JCVI pan-genome pipeline to perform large-scale comparative analysis [28]. PGAP, which comes with a simple command line interface, can perform five processes for pan-genome analysis. Roary, another software used widely, rapidly builds large-scale pan-genomes and identifies the core and accessory genes. Chan et al. assembled the first consensus pan-chromosome and performed large-scale comparative analysis to reveal the highly flexible pan-genome of Acinetobacter baumannii using PanOCT [29]. Adamek et al. performed core-genome and pan-genome analyses using BPGA and PGAP, demonstrating the potential of the genus Amycolatopsis to produce a diverse set of secondary metabolites and the important role of horizontal as well as vertical gene transfer in the acquisition and maintenance of valuable secondary metabolites [30]. Livingstone et al., using Roary, analyzed 23 strains of the Corallococcus species, revealing that the accessory genes exhibited horizontally acquired features and that Corallococcus is a source of novel bioactive secondary metabolites and predatory proteins [31]. Furthermore, Kavvas et al. used machine learning approaches combined with pan-genome analyses of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to identify the signatures of the evolution of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) to 13 antibiotics [32].
In this study, we analyzed the evolutionary relationships among B. subtilis strains and used the gene sets obtained by pan-genome analyses to explore the gene functions and unique features of some strains, detecting a high-quality landscape of the B. subtilis pan-genome by removal of highly divergent strains. By analyzing two data sets of B. subtilis strains downloaded at different times, we found that B. subtilis conforms to the state of an open pan-genome and finally obtained very close pan-genome results from the two data sets through the quality-control method of removing confounding strains. These results demonstrate that our quality-control method for eliminating the biases introduced by confounding strains can significantly improve the reliability and quality of the B. subtilis pan-genome landscape. Finally, we summarize the characteristics of selected candidate deletion gene sets and regions and combine the results derived from the high-quality pan-genome analyses to propose a scheme to achieve further genome reduction for B. subtilis. Our study provides valuable insights for screening suitable strains to approach a highly representative high-quality pan-genome landscape and demonstrates the application of further genome reduction based on these high-quality pan-genome results. Our stepwise manner of gradually removing confounding strains contributes to the pan-genome analysis pipeline by serving as an important step of quality control to eliminate the biases and improve the reliability and quality of pan-genome landscape.
Materials and methods
B. subtilis genome sequencing data
In this study, the complete and chromosome-level genome sequence of B. subtilis strains collected from different geographic locations and isolation sources were analyzed. Sequencing data retrieved from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/) by RefSeq ID in October 2018 and November 2019 are referred as the old (89 strains) and new (153 strains) data sets, respectively (Supplementary Tables S2 and S3). Among these B. subtilis strains, we removed strains whose N base content was greater than 1% of the genomic size (FB6-3, GS 188, SR1), and we removed the chimeric genome BEST7613 with a genome size of 7.6 Mb. After filtering out the above strains, we finally obtained 85 strains in the old data set and 149 strains in the new data set of B. subtilis for subsequent analyses.
Genome annotation
To carry out the subsequent genome research and ensure the consistency and reliability of the annotation and gene prediction of the genome, we used the program Prokaryotic Genome Annotation System (Prokka) [33] to obtain the protein and nucleotide sequence of genes, as well as the annotation files (GFF3, GBK) of each strain. We also performed InterPro (IPR) annotation with the InterProScan [34] program for each strain.
Phylogenetic relationship
To explore the evolutionary level and phylogenetic relationship among B. subtilis strains, we used the program OrthoFinder [35] with default parameters, which utilized the STAG algorithm to construct a species tree inferred from all orthogroups, along with the obtained values of internal nodes, and rooted using STRIDE, to perform multiple sequence alignment based on the protein sequences obtained from Prokka. Moreover, a phylogenetic tree was built by FastTree [36] acquiescently. Finally, we used an online tool iTOL (https://itol.embl.de/), to visualize the phylogenetic tree, which is shown in Figure 1, Supplementary Figures S2–S4.
Average nucleotide identity analysis
Assigned names and classifications of several species in RefSeq have not been verified. To establish an accurate pan-genome, we performed average nucleotide identity (ANI) analysis on the B. subtilis strains investigated here to further determine the correct classification of the strains. ANI based on the BLAST algorithm (ANIb) was performed using average_nucleotide_identity.py script of the PYANI module (v0.2.9; https://github.com/widdowquinn/pyani) with the parameter ‘-m ANIb -g -v’ in Python [37]. The graphical heatmap and dendrogram of ANI values were implemented using the pheatmap package (v1.0.12) in R.
Pan-genome analysis
Based on the GFF3 files obtained from Prokka, we used the Roary [21] pipeline to perform pan-genome analyses. The minimum percentage identity for BLASTP was 95% acquiescently (the ‘–i’ setting in Roary). In pan-genome analysis, determination and selection of the threshold value of the core gene is crucial for the accuracy of pan-genome analysis. In this study, the hard core threshold of 100% obtained from Roary pan-genome pipeline was used as the threshold value of core genes. A hard core threshold (99% ≤ strains ≤ 100%) was adopted instead of a soft core threshold (95% ≤ strains ≤ 99%) mainly for the following reasons: (i) several studies rely on high-quality pan-genome results, such as rational genome designs in synthetic biology and metabolic engineering. These studies require a precise identification of core, accessory and unique genes, i.e. genes present in all strains included. When the threshold is set as 95%, some genes that are not shared by all strains would be identified as core genes, while these genes would be identified as accessory genes when the hard core threshold is adopted. Genes identified as core genes with the soft core threshold would not be deleted in subsequent genome reduction analysis, resulting in a limited reduction. To obtain stricter criteria for core gene classification to improve pan-genome quality, a hard core threshold should be adopted. (ii) In the pan-genome analyses, the old and new data sets that we collected are all strains with complete or chromosome assembly, because they have high assembly quality with credible annotations. With these assemblies, when a hard core threshold is selected, the genes will be reliably classified based on sufficient gene annotations, which is also necessary for obtaining a high-quality pan-genome. (iii) When the number of studied strains in a pan-genome analysis is less than 100, a hard core threshold of 100% is used to classify core genes with Roary acquiescently, otherwise a hard core threshold of 99% is adopted. Furthermore, as the core threshold is implemented more stringently, the number of core essential genes decreases, while the number of accessory essential genes increases, which means some core essential genes will be identified as accessory essential genes. Core genes, which play an important linkage to essence of species, could best represent inherited characters within species, so it is necessary to perform pan-genome analysis with a hard core threshold to identify core genes shared by all strains to generate a high-quality pan-genome. In addition, even for complete genomes, assembly differences or errors could lead to several core genes being absent in a given genome. The core threshold of 99% may lead to the core gene set being larger for the new larger data set than the old smaller data set, which is obviously improper for the identification of core genes. Therefore, in order to maintain the consistency of the core gene thresholds of the two data sets, no matter the number of studied strains is (more or less than 100), we chose 100% as the hard core threshold to identify the core genes that were shared by all strains in the old or new data set. Furthermore, we have presented all the results from pan-genome analyses based on different core thresholds in Tables 1 and 2, which demonstrates the improvement of the reliability and quality of the B. subtilis pan-genome landscape using both data sets.
By using BLASTN (e-value = 1e − 5), we aligned core, accessory and unique genes from the ultimate high-quality pan-genome of 128 strains against the database of the essential gene (DEG) (http://www.essentialgene.org/) [38]. The overlapping portion between the genes from the Roary results and the essential genes was studied based on the identity and bit score. Moreover, we used R to map the petal plot to visualize the number of unique genes in each strain obtained from the pan-genome analysis of 79 strains (Supplementary Figure S5) and 145 strains (Figure 2), where petal colors correspond to the clade colors in the phylogenetic tree.
COG analysis of pan-genome
A series of strains of B. subtilis using two data sets were analyzed by pan-genome analysis to obtain three types of genes: core genes, accessory genes and unique genes. By using BLASTX (e-value = 1e − 5), we aligned these three types of genes from the pan-genome analysis of 128 strains against the latest bacterial Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins database (COGs) [39]. Each gene with the highest identity and bit score in the blast results was compared with the categories of the COG database. Detailed results of the COG analysis are shown in Supplementary Figure S6. In subsequent genome reduction analysis, accessory genes matched to category X of the COG database, which is related to HGT, are accordingly mapped to B. subtilis reference 168 genome (NC_000964.3) in Circos [40].
Gene functional enrichment analyses
We performed gene functional enrichment analyses on the three types of genes obtained from pan-genome analyses to explore the enriched functions and pathways of gene sets. Since the OrgDB annotation package for B. subtilis is not available in Bioconductor (http://bioconductor.org/packages/3.9/data/annotation/), we used the R package AnnotationForge [41] to make a custom OrgDB package for B. subtilis, named as org.BSubtilis.eg.db and org.BnewSubtilis.eg.db for the old and new data sets, respectively. The procedures for making OrgDB annotation files with the AnnotationForge package were as follows. (i) The three types of genes obtained from the pan-genome analysis were aligned to the UniProt/Swiss-Prot (reviewed) database (ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/complete/uniprot_sprot.fasta.gz) to ob-tain the matched UniProtKB ID of each gene; next, the above utilized UniProtKB ID was aligned against idmapping.tb.gz (ftp://ftp.pir.georgetown.edu/databases/idmapping/idmapping.tb.gz) to obtain the GO ID of each gene. (ii) We used the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) [42] tool in the bi-directional best hit mode to annotate the KEGG ORTHOLOGY number of each gene and merged them into one file. (iii) We used the local version eggnog-mapper [43] comprehensively to annotate genes with the aligning program DIAMOND [44]. (iv) We integrated the different annotation information obtained from the above three steps in R and used the package AnnotationForge to make a custom OrgDB package for B. subtilis for subsequent enrichment analyses. After making the OrgDB annotation package, the R package clusterProfiler [45] and DOSE [46] were used to perform GO and KEGG functional enrichment analysis of core, accessory and unique genes as well as additional core genes between different strain sets. The ‘BH’ method was used to filter out the false-positive results, and the cutoff of q-value (P adjust) to indicate statistical significance was 0.01 and 0.1 for GO and KEGG enrichment analyses, respectively, in the old and new data set.
Please refer to the Supplementary Figure S1 and Supple-mentary Table S1 for the complete analysis process and the bioinformatics program with parameters used in this study.
Results
Pan-genome and gene functional enrichment analyses
Influence of incorrectly classified Bacillus strains on pan-genome analysis
The prokaryotic genome annotation tool Prokka was used to annotate the genomes of B. subtilis, generating GFF3 and GBK annotation files and the sequences of predicted genes and proteins for each strain. During evolution of these species, their genes will change under the selective pressures. HGT, gene duplications and large amplifications also contribute to the variation of bacterial genomes [47]. Accordingly, genome size and gene number are variable in bacterial populations, reflecting the evolution of various functions and selective advantages in the process of adaptive evolution. OrthoFinder was used to construct, with default parameters, two phylogenetic trees of 85 and 149 strains after removing strains with N base content above 1% and the chimeric genome BEST7613 (Figure 1A and Supplementary Figure S2). From these phylogenetic trees, we found that six strains of B. subtilis (ATCC-13952, ATCC-19217, ATCC-49760, B-1, Bs-916 and J-5) among 85 strains (old data set) and four strains of B. subtilis (B-1, Bs-916, J-5 and HDZK-BYSB7) among 149 strains (new data set) were far from other strains in evolutionary distance, which was also confirmed by ANIb analysis shown in Figure 3. We then removed these strains from both data sets and reconstructed the phylogenetic trees, which were composed of the remaining 79 and 145 strains (Figure 1B and Supplementary Figure S3). These trees showed high phylogenetic diversity and clear evolutionary relationships among the B. subtilis strains. We also found that strains IIG-Bs27-47-24, PG10 and PS38 were the most visible in terms of genomic length and gene number as these possessed reduced genomes derived from strain delta6 (marked as purple square in Figures 1 and 2, Supplementary Figures S2–S4) [11]. Including Bacillus amyloliquefaciens as the outgroup, a phylogenetic tree was also constructed for 80 strains (Supplementary Figure S4) to further describe the phylogenetic relationship among B. subtilis strains studied in the old data set.
As seen from the phylogenetic trees of 85 strains from the old data set and 149 strains from the new data set, ATCC-13952, ATCC-19217, B-1, Bs-916 and J-5 have the highest GC content, while ATCC-49760 and HDZK-BYSB7 have significantly lower GC content than other strains (Supplementary Tables S2 and S3, Supplementary Figure S2, and Figure 1A). Using the MCscanX program [48], we also explored the collinear relationship and orthologous distribution of genes between the six abnormally and phylogenetically distinct strains and the B. subtilis reference strain 168 (NC_000964.3) within the old data set (Supplementary Figure S7). The collinear circle plot indicates that five of the strains (except ATCC-49760) have a good evolutionary relationship with each other, which is consistent with the phylogenetic relationship and results as mentioned above. However, ATCC-49760 was evolutionarily distant from strain 168 but was close to ATCC-13952 (Supplementary Figure S2).
We then performed pan-genome analyses on 85 strains and 149 strains of B. subtilis using Roary to detect the influence of these abnormally and phylogenetically distinct strains on pan-genome analysis. Consequently, the numbers of core genes, accessory genes and unique genes with hard core threshold were 183, 13 153 and 12 209, respectively, in 85 strains and 4, 14 963 and 13 850, respectively, in 149 strains (Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 4A and G). However, when we performed pan-genome analyses of the 79 strains and 145 strains without these abnormally and phylogenetically distant strains, the numbers of core genes, accessory genes and unique genes with hard core threshold became 1079, 8829 and 6657, respectively, in 79 strains and 1009, 10 769 and 7669, respectively, in 145 strains (Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 4B and H). This finding demonstrated that the number of core genes drastically increases following the removal of these abnormally and phylogenetically distinct strains. Inclusion of these strains in the analyses of the 85 strains and 149 strains led to the identification of few core genes, which shows the presence of extreme bias. We also performed pan-genome analysis for the 80 strains, which includes an outgroup B. amyloliquefaciens strain DSM7, which is closer to B. subtilis in the Bacillus genus, and the numbers of core genes, accessory genes and unique genes with hard core threshold were 200, 9783 and 10 222, respectively. Surprisingly, the number of core genes increased slightly relative to that obtained through the analysis of the 85 strains. Accordingly, it is important to consider strain particularities identified from collinear and phylogenetic evolutionary analyses, as these genomes should be excluded from pan-genome analyses. Inclusion of these strains does not truly reflect the performance of B. subtilis pan-genome analysis, leading to what we would consider to be a low-quality pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis.
We reasoned that the core gene numbers of 85 strains and 149 strains with hard core threshold were low because of the incorrect naming and classification of the abnormally and phylogenetically distinct strains in RefSeq. Indeed, strains ATCC-49760, ATCC-19217 and ATCC-13952 are no longer included in the new data set (153 strains) confirming our conjecture. To accurately identify the genus where they actually belong to, we collected 53 complete- or chromosome-assembly data sets for the Bacillus genus (Supplementary Table S4). Next, we performed an ANIb analysis of the seven abnormally and phylogenetically distinct strains and the collected Bacillus genus strains (Figure 3A). The heatmap and dendrogram showed that strain HDZK-BYSB7 was likely to be Bacillus thuringiensis serovar koukukian (ANI value = 0.972; square a), four of the six strains B-1, J-5, Bs-916 and ATCC-19217 in the range of 85 strains to 79 strains were likely to be Bacillus velezensis (ANI values = 0.977, 0.982, 0.982 and 0.987, respectively; square b), while strain ATCC-13952 was likely to be B. amyloliquefaciens (ANI value = 0.994; square d) and strain ATCC-49760 was likely to be B. atrophaeus (ANI value = 0.984; square g). Furthermore, we found that B-1, J-5, Bs-916 and ATCC-19217 were closer to ATCC-13952 (ANI values = 0.939, 0.941, 0.940 and 0.939, respectively), while ATCC-49760 and B. subtilis reference strain 168 (NC_000964.3) were distant from ATCC-13952 (ANI values = 0.778 and 0.775, respectively). These observations are consistent with the collinear analysis discussed above. There were two possible causes for Roary to identify a very low number of core genes: extremely fragmented assemblies (thousands of contigs) might lead to frameshifts causing a failure in their identification as unique genes or some strains in the study might be from unrelated species. The first case was unlikely because the B. subtilis genomes we analyzed were either complete or chromosome assemblies, which would not cause a low core gene number. We found that these abnormally and phylogenetically distinct strains can be explained by the second scenario, as they were incorrectly classified in the Bacillus genus, and Roary produced a very low number of core genes due to the contamination strains. These findings further confirmed that these abnormally and phylogenetically distinct strains were named or classified incorrectly in RefSeq, and the pan-genome analyses could be influenced significantly by their inclusion. Therefore, incorrectly classified strains should be identified and removed in the pan-genome analysis to eliminate artificial biases.
Influence of phylogenetically distinct strains on pan-genome analysis
After phylogenetic relationship analyses and ANIb analysis, we found that the involvement of incorrectly classified Bacillus strains could dramatically decrease the number of core genes and influence the quality of the pan-genome. Next, we studied the influence of truly and phylogenetically distinct strains on the basis of pan-genome analysis. In the phylogenetic tree (Figure 1B and Supplementary Figure S3), after removing incorrectly classified strains, it appeared that there were several obviously distant clades in the phylogenetic tree. In the old data set, phylogenetically distinct strains were TU-B-10, MJ01, W23, NRS-231, KCTC-13429, DE111, CW14 and BJ3-2, while in the new data set, phylogenetically distinct strains were BJ3-2, CW14, DE111, KCTC-13429, W23, ATCC-6633, FDAARGOS_606, NRS_231, TU-B-10 and MJ01. To assess their influence on pan-genome results, we performed pan-genome analysis on 71 strains and 135 strains, excluding the phylogenetically distinct strains. The pan-genome analysis identified that the number of core, accessory and unique genes were 1346, 6054 and 5192, respectively, in the 71 strains and 1191, 8186 and 6298, respectively, in the 135 stains (Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 4C and I). Similarly, we performed ANIb analyses for 85 strains and 149 strains to detect the relationship between these phylogenetically distinct strains and other B. subtilis strains (Figure 3B and C). The heatmap and dendrogram of ANI values showed that the ANI values of six incorrectly classified strains ranged from 77.5 to 80.5%, and those of eight phylogenetically distinct strains ranged from 92.71 to 96% (except six incorrectly classified stains) among the 85 strains (Figure 3B). While the ANI values of four incorrectly classified strains ranged from 71.1 to 78.5%, the ANI values of 10 phylogenetically distinct strains ranged from 92.66 to 96% (except 10 incorrectly classified strains) among the 149 strains (Figure 3C). Based on the typical ANI threshold, ANI analyses showed that the strains with ANI values below 80% were significantly distant from other B. subtilis strains, which further confirmed our results above. After removing incorrectly classified strains, we plotted petal diagrams of unique genes for each strain obtained from the pan-genome analysis of the 79 and 145 strains. The petal diagrams (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure S5) were divided into different color ranges according to the corresponding clades in the phylogenetic tree (Figure 1B and Supplementary Figure S3). We found that the numbers of unique genes in the same clade were relatively similar, except for strains QB5413 and BS155. However, based on the ANI values, they were less similar to other B. subtilis strains and these unique genes may lead to distant evolution. On the other hand, a fairly large percentage of unique genes are merely assembly or annotation artifacts. Therefore, phylogenetically distinct strains might cause an incorrect identification of unique genes in pan-genome analyses, and they should be removed to obtain an accurate identification of unique genes among strain sets without biases from distant evolution or artificial defects.
Influence of chimeric and engineered genome-reduced strains on pan-genome analysis
Due to the rapid development of techniques in synthetic biology, an increasing number of artificial biological systems have been built. In fact, some artificial genomes of Bacillus species have been stored in GenBank, which should be used with caution in pan-genome analyses (Table 3). Some engineered genome-reduced strains have been produced for B. subtilis, including delta6 (△6), IIG-Bs27-47-24, PG10 and PS38. Furthermore, a chimeric genome of strain BEST7613 that harbors the complete bacterial genomes of Synechocystis PCC6803 and B. subtilis strain 168 in one cell has been created by megacloning [49]. In this study, we excluded the chimeric strain BEST7613 at the very beginning, because if we performed pan-genome analysis including strain BEST7613, most genes from Synechocystis strain PCC6803 would be considered as unique genes from strain BEST7613; consequently, the pan-genome of B. subtilis would be expanded incorrectly, which would lead to inaccurate results from pan-genome analyses. Furthermore, there were four engineered genome-reduced strains mentioned above in the pan-genome analyses within both data sets. After removal of these engineered genome-reduced strains, the numbers of core, accessory and unique genes in the remaining 67 strains in the old data set were 1874, 5491 and 5223, respectively, and the numbers among the remaining 131 strains in the new data set were 1660, 7682 and 6347, respectively (Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 4D and J). According to the pan-genome analysis of the 71 and 135 strains, the total gene numbers were almost the same, but additional sets of 536 and 469 core genes were identified in the old and new data sets, respectively. The number and proportion of the absent core genes from strains delta6 (△6), IIG-Bs27-47-24, PG10 and PS38 within these additional 536 core genes were 35 (6.53%), 390 (72.76%), 405 (75.56%) and 483 (90.11%), respectively. GO and KEGG functional enrichment results (Supplementary Figure S8) of these 536/469 additional core genes suggested that they were significantly enriched in the processes related to locomotion, bacterial-type flagellum organization and chemotaxis. Chemotaxis is clearly an advantage because it helps bacteria to avoid unfavorable conditions and seek optimum environments [50]. Furthermore, bacterial flagella are vital organelles that push cells toward favorable niches and carry out signal transduction [51]. These additional core genes, which were regarded as accessory genes through the pan-genome analysis of the 71 and 135 strains, were corrected to be core genes in the pan-genome analysis results obtained without the engineered genome-reduced strains. Therefore, the inclusion of these genome-reduced strains could reduce the core gene set of B. subtilis and could suggest that the functional capacity of these four artificial strains might be impaired to some degree, which is consistent with the fact that delta6 (△6) has slight differences in protein secretion, cell motility and protein expression [11]. Accordingly, removal of the chimeric, engineered genome-reduced strains in pan-genome analyses could help to improve the reliability of the high-quality pan-genome, which better reflects the pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis.
Influence of artificial strains with abnormally numerous unique genes on pan-genome analysis
In the process of the gene functional enrichment analyses, we found that the q-values of the GO and KEGG enrichment results of unique genes derived from 79, 71 and 67 strains in the old data set and 145, 135 and 131 strains in the new data set were almost equal to 1. This indicates that the unique genes derived from the pan-genome analysis of the above strains’ exhibited no significant enrichment in any pathway.
Moreover, we found that strains QB5413 and BS155 had the most unique genes which were more numerous than that in other B. subtilis strains in the petal diagrams (Supplementary Figure S5 and Figure 2). To detect the influence of these two particular strains on the performance and quality of the pan-genome analysis results, we plotted the GC profile and Circos diagrams with core genes and unique genes obtained from the pan-genome analysis of the 67 strains (Supplementary Figure S9). The GC profiles were obtained with web server GC-Profile [52]. It was surprising to find a long, straight line in the GC profile of strain QB5413, indicating that the GC content was steady between the genomic positions 3 230 184–4 217 957 bp in the QB5413 genome. We also found that the core genes (marked in blue) and unique genes (marked in green) of QB5413 were complementary in this region in the Circos diagram (Supplementary Figure S9A). We additionally noted that no core genes (marked in blue) occurred between the genomic positions 1 861 333–2 935 555 bp in the BS155 genome when the core threshold was 100%, as indicated by the Circos diagram (Supplementary Figure S9B). We then performed gene functional analysis for the unique genes of QB5413 and BS155, respectively. GO and KEGG functional enrichment showed that the unique genes of QB5413 were still not significantly enriched in any pathway, while the unique genes of BS155 were significantly enriched in pyrophosphatase activity, vitamin binding, amide binding (molecular function, MF), plasma-membrane parts (cellular component, CC), DNA repair, recombination and mismatch repair (KEGG) (Supplementary Figure S10). Interestingly, we found that the unique genes of QB5413 encode the variants of two proteins: 50S ribosomal protein L34 and ribonuclease P protein. However, these genes are duplicated nearly one thousand times in the above abovementioned region exhibiting steady GC content (between positions: 3 230 184–4 217 957 bp), which might lead to the insignificant enrichment of unique genes in strain QB5413 and might demonstrate that QB5413 is an artifact rather than the actual genome. Overall, strain QB5413 has a normal genome size of 4.2 Mbp, but an abnormally large number of genes (5428) and protein-coding genes (5099) might bring into question the quality of the assembly and annotation.
In addition, in the Biosample record (SAMN05781321) of QB5413, it has been noted to be a ‘suppressor mutant of B. subtilis QB5407’. Moreover, in the GBK (RefSeq ID: NZ_CP017313.1) record, the title for QB5413 is ‘hyperactivity of topoisomerase I suppresses the glutamate auxotrophy of a B. subtilis ccpA mutant’. These findings indicate that QB5413 was possibly artificially engineered for rescuing a certain phenotype. We therefore excluded strain QB5413 and reassessed the pan-genome landscape with 66 and 130 strains to obtain a more reliable pan-genome of B. subtilis. Consequently, the number of core, accessory and unique genes were found to be 2420, 4937 and 3292, respectively, among 66 strains and 2150, 7176 and 4416, respectively, among 130 strains (Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 4E and K). After exclusion of strain QB5413, unique genes derived from the pan-genome analysis of the 66 and 130 strains were significantly enriched in DNA metabolic processes, defense response, DNA integration and recombination, viral process (biological process, BP), virion-related component, host cell part, other organism cell (CC), catalytic activity acting on DNA and transposase and recombinase activity (MF) (Figure 7A and B). We also plotted the core genes from the 66 strains into the Circos diagram of strain BS155 (marked in orange). We found that the region (1 861 333–2 935 555 bp) that we had described above as being devoid of core genes (marked in blue) was filled by additional 566 core genes according to the results from the pan-genome analysis of 67 to 66 strains, which further demonstrated that the QB5413 genome sequence was likely to be incorrect (Supplementary Figure S9B). GO and KEGG enrichment analysis of these additional 566 core genes within this region (1 861 333–2 935 555 bp) (Supplementary Figure S11) showed an enrichment in cellular amino acid metabolic processes, regulation of biosynthetic processes, the phenylalanine pathway, tyrosine biosynthesis and tryptophan biosynthesis. This finding suggests that these genes perform fundamental functions for bacteria. However, these genes were absent in the core genes of 67 strains, indicating that strain QB5413 may have removed these 566 additional core genes and added two types of repetitive genes in their place. It is possible then that strain QB5413 may have a nutritional deficiency or growth impairment due to the lack of these additional 566 core genes. Accordingly, we are confident in stating that the inclusion of QB5413 affects the recognition of the true core gene set of the B. subtilis strains studied, resulting in the erroneous performance of the pan-genome analysis. Therefore, we hypothesize that strain QB5413 is also an artificially engineered strain, and we recommend that special strains with abnormally numerous unique genes should be considered carefully in the process of pan-genome analyses.
Influence of strains with large proportion of pseudogenes on pan-genome analysis
Based on the above analyses, we found two genomes QB5413 and BS155 as outliers in terms of the number of unique genes. Regarding strain QB5413, our comprehensive analyses demonstrated the possibility of suspected artificiality and its severe impact on the pan-genome results. Regarding strain BS155, its unique genes were significantly enriched after excluding QB5413. However, in the RefSeq genome annotation record (NZ_CP029052.1) of BS155, there is an outlier in terms of the number of pseudogenes (1737), of which 1681 are indicated to be frameshifted. Moreover, in the Biosample record (SAMN08143214), the sample type is indicated to be ‘single cell’, which is known to be challenging for sequencing and assembly. Accordingly, a large part of the unique genes of BS155, which are indicated to be frameshifted pseudogenes, would be classified as ‘unique genes’ in the pan-genome pipeline with Roary. However, these frameshifted pseudogenes should be excluded from the pan-genome analyses because they could interfere with the identification of true unique genes. Moreover, we found that the BS155 genome was obviously an outlier among the B. subtilis strains based on its branch distance in the phylogenetic trees, which further demonstrated its unbalancing impact on phylogenetic diversity and pan-genome quality. We then counted the proportion of pseudogenes in each strain in both old and new data sets (Supplementary Tables S2 and S3) and found that BS155 and D12-5 possess the largest proportion of pseudogenes (37.96% and 11.32%) among the B. subtilis strains. Moreover, in the RefSeq genome annotation record (NZ_CP014858.1) of D12-5, there is an outlier in terms of the number of pseudogenes (490), of which 443 are indicated to be frameshifted. We then performed pan-genome analyses of 64 strains and 128 strains after excluding these two strains from both data sets (Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 4F and L).
According to the gene functional enrichment analyses of the pan-genome unique genes, we found that, before the removal of the two genomes, the unique genes were significantly enriched in the pathways of mismatch repair, DNA replication, DNA repair and recombination protein, and homologous recombination. In contrast, after the removal of the two genomes, the unique genes were significantly enriched in the pathways of DNA replication, prokaryotic defense systems and AMR. This comparison indicated that the unique genes including pseudogenes from BS155 and D12-5 largely function in intracellular pathways, while unique genes in the analysis excluding pseudogenes mostly function in defense and stress resistance pathways, which are advantageous during adaptive evolution. However, a large majority of genes that function in the cellular cycle are often core genes and some accessory genes, while unique genes usually function in regulating interactions with external environments. Therefore, unique genes derived from the analysis that included BS155 and D12-5 were incorrectly identified due to a large proportion of pseudogenes. In addition, Cheetham et al. mentioned that pseudogenes, i.e. regions containing defective copies of genes, often play important biological roles, which explains why unique genes of BS155 also perform some biological functions [53]. However, the origin of pseudogenes in BS155 is unclear. The functional pseudogenes might have been obtained via retro-transposition of processed mRNAs or segmental duplication. Regardless of the source, it is not a part of the natural unique gene expression of BS155. Unique genes play an important role in the process of adaptive evolution, and the presence of pseudogenes, which are not natural unique genes, would highly influence the identification of the true unique genes within species. As Cheetham et al. proposed, the term pseudogene should be used sparingly. Accurate detection of pseudogenes would not only help in understanding genomic functions but might also facilitate the identification of truly natural unique genes. Therefore, strains with a large proportion of pseudogenes should be examined more carefully and excluded in the process of pan-genome analyses for an improved representation of the unique genes and for the improvement of pan-genome landscape quality. The high-quality pan-genomes within species might accelerate the efforts to identify valuable pseudogenes based on ultimate high-quality unique gene sets.
Influence of multiple nearly clonal laboratory strains on pan-genome analysis
As the origins and annotations of some multiple nearly clonal laboratory strains are not clearly recorded and documented in NCBI, it is not accurate to judge multiple clonal strains based on the similarity of strain names in the studied data sets. Genes specific to a certain strain are identified as unique genes in the pan-genome. However, when multiple clones of a strain are present in the data set, these strain-specific genes (unique genes) would be shared by two or more strains, so they would be identified as ‘accessory genes’, which will cause bias in the pan-genome analysis results. In addition, some unique genes are, in reality, artifacts; however, when the multiple clonal strains are included, these unique genes are incorrectly identified as having accessory gene functions. Therefore, when information on known multiple clonal strains is sufficient for pan-genome analysis, the origin and assembly level of the multiple clonal strains (purposeful engineering or inadvertent evolution) need to be judged. Moreover, these multiple clonal strains should be removed from pan-genome analysis. Due to insufficient information provided by NCBI, we did not remove possible multiple clonal strains in our data sets; therefore, our ultimate results are close to representing a high-quality B. subtilis landscape. However, when multiple clonal strains are included, they would mainly affect accessory genes and unique genes, while the core genes would be hardly affected unless the multiple clonal strains contained known alterations or deletions of genes with vital functions. Therefore, our ultimate high-quality pan-genome analysis could identify high-quality core genes, which best represent the essence of B. subtilis. To obtain a higher quality pan-genome landscape, our analysis also involves the removal of multiple clonal strains during the process of removing confounding strains. When data on the multiple clonal strains (differences of assembly, annotation, origin, growth conditions, etc.) are provided, these strains are recommended to be removed to obtain higher quality identification of accessory genes and unique genes.
B. subtilis pan-genome state
Detecting homologs, paralogs and gene duplications in pan-genome analyses is an important step, which is always applied to study the pan-genome state of species (open versus close). In an open pan-genome, the total gene number of the pan-genome increases with the number of additionally sequenced strains, indicating an exchange of genetic material in mixed microbial communities [54]. Close pan-genome, on the other hand, describes the pan-genomes where the addition of newly sequenced strains would not increase the number of new genes to the species pan-genome, indicating a limited living environment. Therefore, new genes play an important role in judging the pan-genome state of species (open versus close). Furthermore, as Chan et al. [29] indicated, it is better to make sure that there is no ascertainment bias such as inclusion of redundant strains since it might introduce a bias in the judgment of the pan-genome state (open versus close). In our two data sets, the redundant genomes that we chose to exclude were strains 168 (NZ_CP010052.1, NZ_CP019663.1, NZ_CP019662.1, and NZ_CM000487.1), NCIB 3610 (NZ_CP034484.1and NZ_CM000488.1) and TOL3 (NZ_CP021169.1). We carried out PGAP with the parameter ‘-- cluster -pangenome -method GF’ and PanGP [55] with the distance guide (DG) algorithm to detect the pan-genome state of B. subtilis. To detect the effect of redundant strains on the pan-genome state, we performed comparative analysis using the old data set of 79 strains including redundant strains and the new data set of 121 strains that excluding the redundant strains based on the pan-genome analysis of 128 strains (Figure 5). Comparative analyses result for the pan-genome profiles demonstrated that the total gene number of both strain sets (79 and 121) increases with the number of sequenced strains, while the number of core genes tend to a gradually decrease to a minimum (1458 in 79 strains and 3022 in 121 strains), which remains relatively constant even as the number of genes increase. Examining the new genes profile and trend curve, we found that the trend of new gene additions tends to be stable with an increase in the number of sequenced strains, which indicated that the B. subtilis genome is consistent with an open pan-genome. However, the number of new genes showed little increase in some of the 79 strains. For example, when the number of sequenced strains number was 23, the number of new genes was very low, indicating that redundant genomes provided no new genes. In addition, the R2 values of the new gene curve for the 79 and 128 strains were 0.286387 and 0.806922, respectively, indicating that when redundant strains are present, the production of new genes is unstable, and the combination strains including redundant genes would provide a very small number of new genes. When the redundant strains were excluded, the rate of production of new genes approaches a constant value as the number of genomes increase. Furthermore, the results of pan-genome analysis obtained from the 121 strains after removing seven redundant genomes were similar to those obtained from the 128 strains. Therefore, redundant genes in pan-genome studies would not significantly impact the identification of core, accessory and unique genes since they are sequenced multiple times leading to duplicated genomes; however, large-scale redundant genomes did cause biases in judging the pan-genome state. When an open pan-genome species contains large-scale redundant genomes, as the number of sequenced strains increases, the number of new genes gradually decreases and extends to zero, which incorrectly indicates a close pan-genome. Therefore, for accurately judging the open versus close pan-genome state of species, it is necessary to exclude redundant genomes when studying the pan-genome state modeling, for instance, performing a normalization step to choose strains for inclusion as recommended by Chan et al. [29]. In total, the open pan-genome results of 121 strains could better represent the state of B. subtilis. Since the redundant strains have little effect on the pan-genome results, we consider the pan-genome of the 64 strains from the old data set and that of the 128 strains from the new data set as the ultimate representative high-quality pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis in our study.
Representative high-quality pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis
Through the above steps of removing confounding strains, we finally obtained representative high-quality pan-genome results based on the genomes of the 64 strains (old data set) and the 128 strains (new data set) (Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 4F and L). Figure 4 shows that with the gradual removal of confounding strains, the influence and biases from confounding strains on the pan-genome gradually decrease until they are eliminated (From box a to box e). From 64 to 128 strains, the pan-genome size increases with the number of strains, while the numbers of core genes are similar across the number of strains about 2800, which was close to the results for the B. subtilis open pan-genome (3022 in Figure 5C). The stepwise manner of gradually removing the confounding strains from the old and new data sets are integrated into Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure S1, which shows how the confounding strains affect the pan-genome results (the box in each part) at each step, and the old and new data sets of different scales finally exhibit very similar core gene numbers with the hard core threshold of 100%. In addition, the core genes obtained from each step of the old and new data sets are shown in Figure 6. The UpSet plots show that the intersections of different core gene sets exhibit different results due to the existence of different confounding strains, and the numbers of genes are very small, which is consistent with the data presented in the Venn plots. The core genes of the 64 strains and 128 strains exhibited a large proportion of overlapped core genes (Supplementary Figure S12), indicating that our method of removing confounding strains step-by-step could obtain a truly closer core genome that best represents vertical inheritance as a linkage to the essence of a species [54], and a closer representative of a high-quality pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis.
In addition, we carried out the gene functional enrichment analyses for the core, accessory and unique genes derived from all series of pan-genome analyses of old and new data sets in this study combined with the stepwise manner of removing confounding strains (Figure 4). GO functional enrichment (P-value cutoff = 0.01, q-value cutoff = 0.01) (Figure 7A and B) and KEGG functional enrichment analyses (P-value cutoff = 0.1, q-value cutoff = 0.1) (Figure 7C and D) demonstrated that the three types of gene sets (core, accessory and unique genes) had distinctly different functions in BP, CC and MF that were separately analyzed by R package clusterProfiler and the core, accessory and unique genes derived from pan-genome analysis of 64 and 128 strains (Figure 7) demonstrated that different type of genes have a complementary relationship, especially in CC and MF. Functional GO enrichment analyses of unique genes in strains with more than 10 unique genes from the old data set, as presented in the petal plot, showed that unique genes were different among these strains (Supplementary Table S5). With a q-value below 0.01, the high-quality classified core genes from both old and new data sets were mainly enriched in phosphorus-related metabolic processes (BP), ribosome biogenesis, organelles, ribosome-related parts (CC), functions of ion binding and rRNA binding (MF), ribosome, oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial biogenesis (KEGG), which indicated that core genes always perform fundamental and significant functions in cellular life, as reported by Tettelin et al. who found that core genes perform housekeeping functions, e.g. cell envelope, regulatory functions and transport and binding proteins [54].
From the GO enrichment results, the ultimate accessory genes were significantly enriched in organic substance transport, cell wall organization or biosynthesis, cell communication, DNA recombination and integration, defense response (BP), extracellular region, virion-related component, host cell part, other organism cell (CC), catalytic activity acting on DNA and sequence-specific DNA binding (MF). Moreover, from the KEGG enrichment results, accessory genes were significantly enriched in two-component system, QS, prokaryotic defense system and polyketide biosynthesis protein pathways. In addition, it can be found that before removing the engineered genome-reduced strains, some accessory genes were significantly enriched in the bacterial motility process, flagellar assembly and bacterial chemotaxis pathway. However, after removing these strains, these pathways were not enriched, which is consistent with the results from the additional 536 (469) core genes that were significantly enriched in the motility-related pathways. Furthermore, we found that some accessory genes from the high-quality pan-genome of 128 strains were significantly enriched in pathways related to interactions between organisms and the environment. When combined with the enrichment of another important pathway, the QS system, the above result indicated that accessory genes play an important role in defense in suboptimal niches through the acquisition of foreign genetic materials from other organisms to rapidly improve their environmental adaptability through HGT, as described by Croll et al., that the accessory genome plays an important role in adaptive evolution [56]. In addition, Yang et al. found that accessory genes play an important role in maintaining harmony between E. coli and the human host through enriched QS-related pathways [18], which confirm the reliability and accuracy of the high-quality pan-genome results that we obtained. As indicated by the above analyses, unique genes were not significantly enriched in any pathway when QB5413 was included. Moreover, unique genes derived from the analysis of the high-quality pan-genome without QB5413 were significantly enriched in mismatch repair, DNA repair and recombination, and AMR, which indicated that unique genes may play an important role in resistance and self-defense under different environmental conditions through insertion elements and adaptive evolution. Furthermore, the enrichment of AMR associated unique genes confirmed that unique genes might play an important role in forming genomic islands as Tettelin et al. found that many of the strain-specific genes were classified into hypothetical /unknown function proteins or located in genomic islands through horizontal transfer [54]. In conclusion, accessory genes and unique genes could both perform adaptive functions through the acquisition or loss of horizontally transferred genes, which were best confirmed by the significant enrichment of accessory, and unique genes based on results from other organisms and host-related pathways. More importantly, high-quality classified unique genes could form genomic islands in response to special niches. Moreover, accessory genes would help to detect the dynamics of gene gain and loss, as well as genetic conflicts and collaborations for pan-genome evolution [57].
We also compared the sequence similarity between the genes derived from the pan-genome analysis of the 128 strains and the essential genes of B. subtilis reference strain 168 (NC_000964.3) collected from the DEG database (the number of essential genes is 271). Based on the alignment result (e-value = 10−5), we found that 214 core genes (214/2521 = 8.49%), 67 accessory genes (67/6192 = 1.08%) and 45 unique genes (45/3333 = 1.35%) were shared by essential genes, suggesting that core genes are, for the most part, a superset of essential genes for B. subtilis (214/271 = 78.97%) and that most nonessential core genes may correspond to robust growth rather than basic survival [58]. In addition, Lewin et al. found that core essential genes perform key functions in cellular life, and that accessory essential genes are also required for survival [59]. In summary, the removal of confounding strains in a stepwise manner from the pan-genome analyses based on the old and new B. subtilis data sets lead to a gradual increase in the number of core genes, ultimately improving the reliability and quality of the pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis. The ultimate pan-genome analysis is based on 64 and 128 B. subtilis strains (Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 4), which are free from the influence of incorrectly classified, phylogenetically distinct, engineered genome-reduced, artificial strains with abnormally numerous unique genes, strains with more pseudogenes, and multiple clonal strains, thereby better reflecting the performance and quality of the B. subtilis pan-genome and resulting in a closer representative of a high-quality pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis. The functional enrichment of ultimately high-quality classified core genes, accessory genes and unique genes would be useful to study the symbiotic regulation of microorganisms and hosts, loss and acquisition of genes in HGT, acquisition and formation of genomic islands, and mechanisms of pan-genome evolution.
Designing the genome reduction of B. subtilis
Based on the representative high-quality pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis obtained above, we sought to reduce the size of the B. subtilis genome. We first mapped known deleted regions from strains delta6 (△6), MGB469, MGB874 and PS38, which had been reduced by 0.32 Mb (7.7%), 0.50 Mb (12.5%), 0.87 Mb (20.7%) and 1.52 Mb (36%), respectively, onto the B. subtilis reference strain 168 genome (NC_000964.3). Next, core genes (hard core threshold of 99 and 100%), soft core genes (soft core threshold of 95%), essential genes and some key genomic elements were simultaneously labeled on the 168 genome using Circos (Figure 8).
To show the relationship between the horizontally transferred genes and the deletion region better, we mapped the accessory genes of the B. subtilis reference strain 168 (NC_000964.3) matched to the X category from COG analysis onto the Circos diagram. Because there is no clear information about the multiple clonal strains, it is hardly to remove them in the current pan-genome analyses. Therefore, B. subtilis reference strain 168 may also have horizontally transferred related unique genes if clonal redundancy could be removed. From these results, we found certain typical characteristics of the deleted regions, which are listed as follows. First, deleted regions were present within the blank interval between essential genes and were mostly within the blank interval between soft core genes. Second, deleted regions tend to be located in the areas of low GC content. Third, horizontally transferred genes (accessory genes derived from the B. subtilis reference strain 168 in X category; Supplementary Table S15) are usually present in deleted regions. Fourth, deleted regions tend to contain the parts that perform secondary metabolism functions. In summary, the deleted regions in these strains are (for the most part) not required for the survival and growth of bacteria. Importantly, soft core genes and core genes can be selectively deleted, while essential genes could not be deleted since their functions are essential for maintaining basic growth and survival. However, some horizontally transferred genes can be deleted to reduce redundancy [60, 61].
Through genome reduction, genome complexity can be reduced, but excessive deletion can cause unpredictable and adverse consequences. For example, the MG1M strain was obtained based on MGB469 by trimming 0.99 Mb (24.7%) from the reference strain 168. This led to defects in cell morphology, growth rate and instability in expressing protein traits [9]. Therefore, combining known results from deletion studies and the characteristic features of the deleted regions, we proposed a scheme to reduce the genome size of B. subtilis. In this scheme, the candidate deletion regions consist of a combination of known deletion regions, excluding portions of the core gene and selecting the final candidate from deleted regions large than 1 Kb, as shown in the black circle in Figure 8. In particular, by mapping the core genes (100% threshold) obtained from the pan-genome analysis of 131 strains that included QB5413 to the reference strain 168 genome (marked in purple), we found that there was a large gap between 1 782 524 and 2 833 898 bp in the reference strain 168 genome. Moreover, after excluding the strain QB5413, there was no lack of core genes among the 128 strains (marked in red, 100% threshold) in this interval. This further confirms that the artificial strain QB5413 with abnormally numerous unique genes should be paid more attention in the process of pan-genome analysis; otherwise, it will cause erroneous results for further analyses. Critically, inclusion of these strains will mislead the genome reduction work. As a final consideration, we complemented the core genes absent in genome-reduced strains in our ultimate genome reduction design. Consequently, our scheme can produce a genome that is 0.86 Mb (20.35%) smaller than the B. subtilis reference strain 168 (Supplementary Table S13). Although the deleted proportion (20.35%) from our scheme was smaller than that of strain PS38 (36%), strain PS38 was analyzed in complex media supplemented with glucose, while our reduced genome will enable B. subtilis to live in natural conditions, as it includes core genes that had been deleted in strain PS38 and other engineered genome-reduced strains. Detailed information regarding the Circos diagram in Figure 8 is provided in Supplementary Tables S6–S15. In summary, our closer representative of a high-quality pan-genome of B. subtilis not only summarizes common characteristics of deleted regions but also provides information to better perform genome reduction in the future.
Conclusion
Pan-genome analysis is currently a widely used method in studying species evolution and functional gene changes. Many research groups have carried out genomic qualitative and quantitative studies between and within species using this method [62, 63]. Furthermore, as many studies require realistic, reliable pan-genome results, a high-quality pan-genome landscape is required. However, the impact of different strains and species selection on the performance and quality of pan-genome analyses is still unclear. As a model strain, B. subtilis has many well-assembled and well-annotated strains, as well as genome-reduced strains, and the representative high-quality pan-genome of B. subtilis would be highly valuable to researchers from various fields. We therefore used B. subtilis as an object to quantitatively assess the impact of B. subtilis strains on the performance and quality of pan-genome analyses. We ultimately obtained a more reliable pan-genome of B. subtilis that is a closer representation of the high-quality pan-genome landscape of B. subtilis, which is not only useful for better understanding different gene functions in B. subtilis but also could be popularized to explore the high-quality pan-genome landscape of other species by removing confounding strains step-by-step.
Beyond addressing the impact of strain on pan-genome analyses, our study aimed to obtain a representative high-quality pan-genome landscape within B. subtilis. As the phylogenetic relationship and ANI analyses have demonstrated above, incorrectly classified strains and phylogenetically distinct strains could greatly reduce the number of core genes identified and skew pan-genome results. We further found that four engineered genome-reduced strains can mislead pan-genome analyses. Due to the deletion of some core genes, genome-reduced strains will affect the correct classification of core genes and results. For example, Kim et al. conducted a pan-genome analysis of Bacillus species to identify core genes. However, this group included genome-reduced B. subtilis strains, e.g. B. subtilis strains delta6 (△6), IIG-Bs27–47-24, PG10 and PS38, which led to reduction in the numbers of core B. subtilis genes identified [64]. To eliminate any confusion caused by artificial genomes, we suggest that the corresponding annotation files (GBK/GFF/BED) of these genomes stored in GenBank should be clearly marked as ‘SYN’ and that keywords, such as ‘Synthetic’ or ‘Artificial’, should be added to strain names. Artificial genomes, especially those that have been boldly designed, may prevent us from discovering natural rules or potential biological mechanisms through standard bioinformatics analysis. Accordingly, early stages in bioinformatics analyses should exclude these genomes. In addition, the growth status of artificial strains should be reported in genome annotations, especially for those with growth and survivability.
Here, we collected old and new data sets containing different complete- or chromosome-assembly-level strains of B. subtilis during our 1-year study. In the whole analysis process, we performed the same analysis on both data sets, using the same programs and the same parameters. We then compared the results separately and found that the ultimate B. subtilis pan-genome results were very similar for the two data sets that were obtained by removing confounding strains, which showed that our stepwise manner of removing these confounding strains (incorrectly classified, phylogenetically distinct, engineered genome-reduced, artificial strains, strains with more pseudogenes and multiple nearly clonal laboratory strains) could significantly improve the reliability and quality of the B. subtilis pan-genome landscape. Furthermore, redundant genomes could impact judgment regarding the true pan-genome state of species (open versus close). Collectively, our screening method also quantitatively and qualitatively eliminated the bias phenomenon in the pan-genome analysis to a certain extent. Moreover, the results of this study will provide useful information for understanding genome function and evolution, providing a structure for reducing genome complexity through deletion of candidate genes. Most significantly, our study will reduce errors in pan-genome analyses at the beginning of data processing and provide perspective on the selection of suitable strains aimed at producing representative high-quality pan-genome landscapes within and between species. Our results can effectively reduce the time required to prepare data for pan-genome analysis, improve the efficiency of the pan-genome analysis process and contribute to the future pan-genome analysis pipeline or protocol as an important quality control step.
Key Points
The impact of the selection of various strains on the results of pan-genome analyses is poorly understood. Furthermore, there is currently no definitive protocol for obtaining a high-quality pan-genome landscape for a given species or isolate sets. We found that the involvement of incorrectly classified strains, phylogenetically distinct strains, chimeric strains, engineered genome-reduced strains, strains with abnormally numerous unique genes or large proportion of pseudogenes, and multiple nearly clonal laboratory strains can significantly impact the performance and quality of pan-genome analyses of B. subtilis. Furthermore, redundant genomes could impact the judgment of true pan-genome stat of a species (open versus close).
Our closer representative high-quality pan-genome of B. subtilis not only summarizes the common characteristics of deleted regions but also provides information to better perform genome reduction in the future.
Our high-quality pan-genome results can best represent the essence of species. Functional enrichment analyses show the basic functions of core genes, the role of accessory genes in horizontal gene transfer (HGT) and defense systems, and the important functions of unique genes in the process of response to environmental changes through forming antimicrobial resistance and adaptive evolution. The functional enrichment of ultimately high-quality classified core gene, accessory gene and unique gene would be useful to study symbiotic regulation of microorganisms and hosts, loss and acquisition of genes in HGT, acquisition and formation of genomic islands and mechanisms of pan-genomic evolution.
Our study will reduce errors in pan-genome analyses at the beginning of data processing and provide perspective on the selection of proper strains aimed at achieving representative high-quality pan-genome landscapes within and between species. Our pan-genome analyses’ stepwise manner of removing confounding strains can effectively reduce the time required to prepare data for pan-genome analysis, can improve the efficiency of pan-genome analysis process and could contribute to future pan-genome analysis pipeline and protocol as an important quality control step.
Artificial genomes, especially those that have been boldly designed, may prevent us from discovering natural rules or potential biological mechanisms through standard bioinformatics analysis. To eliminate any confusion caused by artificial genomes, we suggest that corresponding annotation files (GBK/GFF/BED) of these genomes stored in GenBank should be clearly marked as ‘SYN’ and keywords, such as ‘Synthetic’ or ‘Artificial’, should be added to strain names.











