https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00200-20
Caldicellulosiruptor bescii Adheres to Polysaccharides via a Type IV Pilin-Dependent Mechanism
ABSTRACT Biological hydrolysis of cellulose above 70°C involves microorganisms that secrete free enzymes and deploy separate protein systems to adhere to their substrate. Strongly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor bescii is one such extreme thermophile, which deploys modular, multifunctional carbohydrate-acting enzymes to deconstruct plant biomass. Additionally, C. bescii also encodes noncatalytic carbohydrate binding proteins, which likely evolved as a mechanism to compete against other heterotrophs in carbon-limited biotopes that these bacteria inhabit. Analysis of the Caldicellulosiruptor pangenome identified a type IV pilus (T4P) locus encoded upstream of the tāpirins, that is encoded by all Caldicellulosiruptor species. In this study, we sought to determine if the C. bescii T4P plays a role in attachment to plant polysaccharides. The major C. bescii pilin (CbPilA) was identified by the presence of pilin-like protein domains, paired with transcriptomics and proteomics data. Using immuno-dot blots, we determined that the plant polysaccharide xylan induced production of CbPilA 10- to 14-fold higher than glucomannan or xylose. Furthermore, we are able to demonstrate that recombinant CbPilA directly interacts with xylan and cellulose at elevated temperatures. Localization of CbPilA at the cell surface was confirmed by immunofluorescence microscopy. Lastly, a direct role for CbPilA in cell adhesion was demonstrated using recombinant CbPilA or anti-CbPilA antibodies to reduce C. bescii cell adhesion to xylan and crystalline cellulose up to 4.5- and 2-fold, respectively. Based on these observations, we propose that CbPilA and, by extension, the T4P play a role in Caldicellulosiruptor cell attachment to plant biomass.
IMPORTANCE Most microorganisms are capable of attaching to surfaces in order to persist in their environment. Type IV (T4) pili produced by certain mesophilic Firmicutes promote adherence; however, a role for T4 pili encoded by thermophilic members of this phylum has yet to be demonstrated. Prior comparative genomics analyses identified a T4 pilus locus possessed by an extremely thermophilic genus within the Firmicutes. Here, we demonstrate that attachment to plant biomass-related carbohydrates by strongly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor bescii is mediated by T4 pilins. Surprisingly, xylan but not cellulose induced expression of the major T4 pilin. Regardless, the C. bescii T4 pilin interacts with both polysaccharides at high temperatures and is located to the cell surface, where it is directly involved in C. bescii attachment. Adherence to polysaccharides is likely key to survival in environments where carbon sources are limiting, allowing C. bescii to compete against other plant-degrading microorganisms.
INTRODUCTION Thermophilic microorganisms capable of hydrolyzing all or part of lignocellulosic plant biomass have been of considerable interest for biotechnological applications of their enzymes. Of note are cellulolytic microorganisms which produce the enzymes necessary to hydrolyze recalcitrant plant biomass. The Gram-positive, anaerobic, extremely thermophilic genus Caldicellulosiruptor employs an array of mechanisms for deconstruction of plant biomass (reviewed in reference 1). One hallmark of this genus is modular, multifunctional enzymes comprised of both catalytic and binding domains. Caldicellulosiruptor bescii is a highly cellulolytic member of the genus (2, 3) capable of attaching to and degrading plant biomass at temperatures as high as 90°C (4). Notably, C. bescii is able to degrade insoluble cellulose along with various other plant polysaccharides, like xylan (5) and pectin (6), and can grow efficiently on untreated plant biomass with high lignin content (7–9). Multiple catalytic domains present in modular enzymes encoded by the glucan degradation locus (GDL) (10) diversify the substrates that these enzymes can hydrolyze (11–15).
In multiple studies, Caldicellulosiruptor cells have been observed adhering to plant biomass during growth (4, 9, 16–19), presumably as an adaptation to efficiently degrade lignocellulosic biomass. Given that the genus Caldicellulosiruptor does not produce a cellulosome, other proteins have been implicated in mediating this attachment. All members of the genus Caldicellulosiruptor produce one or more S-layer-bound proteins and enzymes (9, 10). Two S-layer-located proteins from Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus were demonstrated to adhere to cellulose (17). Additionally, S-layer-associated enzymes from Caldicellulosiruptor kronotskyensis facilitated attachment to xylan when heterologously expressed in C. bescii (9). Aside from S-layer-located proteins, other potential plant polysaccharide-interacting proteins are also produced by the genus Caldicellulosiruptor, including substrate-binding proteins, flagella, a type IV pilus (T4P), and uncharacterized hypothetical proteins which were enriched in a cellulose-bound fraction as determined by a proteomics screen (10). Additional C. bescii substrate-binding proteins implicated in attachment to plant biomass have also been identified through extracellular protein identification (20), including an expanded proteomics data set comparing extracellular proteins produced during growth on plant biomass versus crystalline cellulose (21). Both these proteomics studies corroborate the significance of noncatalytic proteins in the process of lignocellulosic plant biomass deconstruction by the genus Caldicellulosiruptor. Structurally unique proteins called tāpirins are another mechanism by which strongly to weakly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor species attach to cellulose from plant biomass (19, 22). Genes encoding tāpirins are located directly downstream of the T4P locus in all cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor species (10, 19, 22); however, it remains to be determined if they interact with the T4P.
Protein expression studies using ruminal cellulolytic bacteria identified pilins as cellulose-binding proteins through comparison of binding-deficient mutants versus the wild type for Fibrobacter succinogenes (23) and Ruminococcus flavefaciens (24). Cellulose affinity pulldown assays using extracellular proteins from Ruminococcus albus 8 (25) and extracellular proteome analysis of a noncellulosomal-binding-deficient R. albus 20 mutant also identified pilin-like proteins, further implicating pili in cellular attachment to cellulose (26). Transcriptomic analysis, however, determined that pilin genes possessed by R. albus 7 were not differentially expressed on cellulose in comparison to cellobiose, possibly indicating that other polysaccharides act as the inducer for pilin expression (27). Taken together, these studies indicate that T4 pilins from other Gram-positive, cellulolytic bacteria, like the genus Caldicellulosiruptor, may facilitate the attachment of cells to cellulose.
Genes required for assembly of a Gram-negative-like T4P are fairly widespread throughout the genus Clostridium (28, 29), including the pathogens Clostridium perfringens (28) and Clostridiodes difficile (30). Major pilins from both C. perfringens (31) and C. difficile (32) have been demonstrated to play a role in adhesion, and heterologous expression of the C. perfringens major pilin gene, pilA2, in T4P-deficient Neisseria gonorrhoeae mutants resulted in attachment to muscle cells (31). Since complemented N. gonorrhoeae strains were capable of adherence, but not twitching motility, there appears to be a limitation to conserved pilin structures dictating T4P function. Recently, the ATPases required for twitching motility in C. perfringens were found to be upregulated in response to colonization and necrosis of murine muscle tissue (33), supporting the role of C. perfringens T4P adherence to muscle cells. Furthermore, C. difficile ΔpilA1 mutants, lacking T4P, had significantly reduced ability to attach to epithelial cells (32).
Gram-negative-like T4P genetic loci are also present in the genomes of members of the plant biomass-degrading genus Caldicellulosiruptor (10). Among the strongly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor species, this locus is located upstream of the tāpirins and modular, multifunctional cellulases (10). Available transcriptomics (4, 8, 34) and proteomics (4, 10, 21, 35) data indicate that this T4P locus is strongly upregulated and that pilin peptides are also present during growth on plant biomass or plant-derived polysaccharides. Considering these data, along with compelling evidence from ruminal and pathogenic Firmicutes that indicates the involvement of T4P in adherence (23–25, 31, 32), we propose that the C. bescii T4P plays a role in attachment to plant polysaccharides during plant biomass deconstruction.
RESULTS The Caldicellulosiruptor bescii genome encodes a type IV pilus. Based on genome sequence data available for C. bescii (4), we confirmed that all essential genes required for assembly of a Gram-negative-like type IV pilus (T4P) are present (Fig. 1A), including a pilin subunit, prepilin peptidase, assembly ATPase, and membrane proteins that recruit the ATPase (29). Similar to T4P locus organization in other Gram-positive bacteria (36), the C. bescii T4P locus genes are arranged colinear in an operon, as there are no gaps larger than 71 bp between the T4P genes, and only a single hairpin sequence is predicted within the prepilin peptidase coding sequence in the T4P locus (see Table S1 in the supplemental material). In order to identify putative pilins from the C. bescii T4P locus, we screened amino acid sequences for an N-terminal prepilin cleavage site (GFxxxE) that is posttranslationally modified by the prepilin peptidase (PilD) prior to pilus assembly (37). We also screened for typical Gram-positive-sortase-dependent amino acid motifs (LPxTG [38]); however, none were identified in the T4P locus. Based on the presence of a prepilin cleavage site, we identified five genes (Athe_1872, Athe_1876, Athe_1877, Athe_1880, and Athe_1881) as encoding putative pilins (Table 1). Predicted protein lengths for these range in size from 130 amino acids (aa) (Athe_1880) to 277 aa (Athe_1872); furthermore, when we analyzed the leader peptide for all five predicted pilins, they all were found to be of variable lengths, ranging from 5 up to 21 amino acids long (Table 1; Fig. S1). Based on the total amino acid lengths predicted for Athe_1880 and Athe_1881, these proteins are typical of T4a pilins (39); however, Athe_1880 has a leader peptide 15 amino acids in length, which is not typical for T4a pilins.
When comparing the organization of the T4P locus of C. bescii to those of 14 other sequenced Caldicellulosiruptor species including a metagenome-assembled genome, we observed that the T4P locus organization was highly conserved. Despite this, orthologous pilins shared as little as 35.2 up to 100% amino acid sequence identity (Table S2), indicating that there may be some evolutionary adaptations in pilins encoded by strongly cellulolytic versus weakly cellulolytic species (10, 34, 40–42). A phylogenetic tree built from alignment of concatenated pilin proteins from 15 sequenced Caldicellulosiruptor species was constructed to assess if there were correlations between cellulolytic ability and the T4P (Fig. 1B). Interestingly, the majority of highly cellulolytic species cluster together; however, the pilin proteins encoded by cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor morganii and Caldicellulosiruptor changbaiensis are more divergent (Table S2), and cluster with weakly cellulolytic species (Fig. 1B). While C. changbaiensis was demonstrated to be capable of adhering to cellulose, it is incapable of adhering to xylan (42), indicating that the divergent amino acid sequences may impact adherence to polysaccharides. This difference in the attachment strategies within the Caldicellulosiruptor genus lends credence to our primary hypothesis that the T4P, on account of its proximity to modular, multidomain glycoside hydrolases, plays a role in plant biomass attachment preceding enzymatic deconstruction.
Predicted secondary structures of these putative pilins indicate that these pilins share common regions with the Gram-negative T4 pilins, which include an N-terminal alpha helix (α1) and an αβ loop separating the α1 helix from the antiparallel β sheets (Fig. 2, yellow) in the globular C-terminal domain (39, 43). Gram-negative T4 pilins typically have cysteine residues that define and stabilize the D region (39, 43); however, no D region could be identified for C. bescii putative pilins, as they lack the cysteine residues. Based on the predicted secondary structure and the amino acid length, mature Athe_1880 resembles a T4a pilin; however, the major pilin from Clostridiodes difficile was also originally predicted to be a T4a pilin on the basis of structural prediction (29), but its solved structure (PDB accession numbers 4TSM, 4OGM, and 4PE2) resembled that of T4b pilins (44).
Athe_1880 is the major pilin (CbPilA) based on transcriptomics and proteomics evidence. We expected that the major C. bescii pilin (CbPilA) would be highly expressed and would constitute the majority of the T4P structure; therefore, we examined publicly available transcriptomics and proteomics data available for C. bescii. The major C. bescii pilin should either be upregulated as determined by transcriptomics data or enriched as peptide fragments in proteomics data. Data sets from three independent comparative transcriptomic studies of C. bescii grown on switchgrass versus glucose (8), filter paper versus glucose (4), and microcrystalline cellulose versus switchgrass (34) indicated that Athe_1880 and Athe_1881 are the most highly upregulated genes among the candidate pilins (Table 2). Proteomics data for protein abundance on microcrystalline cellulose confirmed that Athe_1880 is the most abundant of all of the candidate pilins across three independent sets of proteomics data (4, 10, 35). These data were further corroborated by a recent study on the extracellular proteome of C. bescii in which Athe_1880 was found to have a fold change greater than 2× on complex substrates like xylan, switchgrass, and Avicel than on simple substrates like xylose, glucose, and cellobiose (21). Given both the transcriptomic and proteomic evidence, we propose that Athe_1880 (CbPilA) is the major pilin represented in the T4P filament of C. bescii. We then sought to produce soluble, recombinant CbPilA (rCbPilA) using rational design, informed by predicted secondary protein structures (Fig. 2), in order to produce truncated rCbPilA lacking the highly hydrophobic α-1N region (Fig. S2).
Xylan is the key inducer of CbPilA. Previously published transcriptomics and proteomics data confirmed that CbpilA gene expression and protein production were upregulated when C. bescii was grown on polysaccharides or plant biomass versus mono- or disaccharides (4, 8, 10, 21, 34, 35). Based on this evidence, it is natural to assume that cellulose would be the main polysaccharide regulating the T4P operon. Since the other representative plant polysaccharides had yet to be tested, we sought to examine if hemicellulose polysaccharides played any role in the regulation of the T4P by monitoring the presence of extracellular CbPilA in samples harvested from batch cultures. A custom polyclonal antibody was generated against rCbPilA for this purpose, and we confirmed that this antibody was specific for native CbPilA, in comparison to three predicted pilins from C. bescii (Fig. S3).
In addition to carbohydrate induction of pilin production, we also tracked CbPilA production over time using immuno-dot blots. C. bescii cultures were cultured on 5 different plant polysaccharide-related carbohydrates—cellulose, pectin, glucomannan, xylan, and xylose—and sampled during the early exponential phase, mid-exponential phase, and late exponential phase. Xylan induced a 10-fold-larger amount of CbPilA production (7.7 pg cell−1) than glucomannan (0.75 pg cell−1) or xylose (0.51 pg cell−1) at late exponential growth (Fig. 3). Furthermore, the amount of CbPilA protein quantified also increased in a growth phase-dependent manner for all sugars tested, with no detectable CbPilA present during early exponential phase for growth on glucomannan and xylose. The most dramatic increase was noted during growth on xylan, with over a 3.5-fold increase in CbPilA from early to late exponential growth (Fig. 3). Interestingly, while cellulose is the major component of plant biomass, it was the least effective polysaccharide for inducing T4P production during growth on a defined medium, and extracellular CbPilA was below measurable limits, as was also the case for pectin (data not shown). Given that xylan induced the highest levels of CbPilA protein, we concluded that it is, in fact, xylan rather than cellulose that is the main inducer of CbPilA.
rCbPilA interacts with polysaccharides at elevated temperatures. Since xylan was the main inducing polysaccharide for CbPilA production, we tested for an interaction between rCbPilA and insoluble carbohydrates, using polysaccharide pulldown assays. It is common practice to use incubation temperatures lower than physiological temperature when testing thermostable proteins (45, 46); however, no interaction was noted when rCbPilA was incubated with xylan or microcrystalline cellulose at 25°C (Fig. 4). When the incubation temperature was increased to a physiologically relevant temperature (75°C), we observed that rCbPilA adsorbed to insoluble xylan or microcrystalline cellulose (Fig. 4). At 75°C, the absence of an rCbPilA protein band in the negative control indicates that observations of rCbPilA in the bound fractions are not the result of nonspecific adsorption to the microcentrifuge tubes used for this assay (Fig. 4). To validate the specificity of this assay, we also tested a recombinant C. bescii tāpirin (Fig. S4A). As expected, the tāpirin protein was capable of adsorbing to microcrystalline cellulose, as was previously observed (19, 22); however, a denser band was observed after incubation at 75°C (Fig. S4B), similar to our observations with rCbPilA. Densitometry analysis confirmed that more recombinant tāpirin adsorbed to microcrystalline cellulose than the microcentrifuge tube (Fig. S4B), whereas the density of the protein band in the xylan-bound fraction was no different than that of the negative control and was likely due to nonspecific adsorption (Fig. S4C).
CbPilA is localized to the C. bescii cell surface. Although immuno-dot blots confirmed the production of CbPilA protein by C. bescii cells (Fig. 3), we wanted to confirm that CbPilA is located at the cell surface. To visualize CbPilA, we labeled C. bescii cells grown on xylan with anti-CbPilA polyclonal serum and a fluorescently tagged anti-chicken secondary antibody. We expect that the signal is specific for CbPilA and not the other predicted minor pilins, as the anti-CbPilA antibody minimally interacts with other predicted pilins at the dilution used for immunofluorescence microscopy (Fig. S3), and previous proteomics studies did not detect any of the other minor pilins during growth on xylan (4, 21). A fluorescent signal from anti-CbPilA antibodies was observed surrounding C. bescii cells during growth on xylan (Fig. 5B and C) but not during growth on xylose (Fig. 5E and F). Based on the direct interaction of rCbPilA with xylan at 75°C (Fig. 4), we suspected that the larger fluorescing green clusters in Fig. 5B were residual xylan particles coated with CbPilA. To verify this, we incubated xylan and rCbPilA at 75°C and processed those samples for immunofluorescent microscopy to detect any CbPilA bound to xylan. As expected, we could detect a fluorescent signal from rCbPilA-treated xylan (Fig. 5H) which resembles the fluorescing green clusters in Fig. 5B. To ensure that the fluorescent signal was not the result of a nonspecific interaction between anti-CbPilA and xylan, we included a biomass-only xylan control in which uninoculated low-osmolality defined (LOD) medium was processed with both primary and secondary antibodies (Fig. S5H). We were unable to detect a fluorescent signal, supporting the idea that anti-CbPilA was not adsorbing to xylan and the fluorescent signal detected with rCbPilA-treated xylan (Fig. 5H) was a specific CbPilA-xylan interaction. Furthermore, C. bescii cells grown on xylan or xylose and processed with only the secondary antibody (Fig. S5A to F) lacked any fluorescent signal, establishing that nonspecific adsorption of the secondary antibody was not contributing to the signal.
C. bescii cell adhesion to polysaccharides is CbPilA dependent. Given the proximity of the T4P locus to tāpirin proteins and major cellulases used by C. bescii (10), we originally hypothesized that the major pilin was functioning as an adhesin by binding to plant polysaccharides. Based on the affinity of rCbPilA for xylan (Fig. 4 and 5), we further examined its role in adherence by assessing if it would interfere with C. bescii attachment to insoluble polysaccharides, using a planktonic cell attachment assay. Our experimental design allowed us to test whether the presence of rCbPilA and/or substrate influenced the attachment of planktonic cells to insoluble substrates (Fig. 6). In these assays, a reduction in planktonic cell densities (PCD) after treatment is indicative of cell attachment. Based on the increased production of CbPilA protein in response to xylan, we tested C. bescii cells grown on xylan for the ability to attach to insoluble xylan or cellulose (Fig. 7A and C). As a comparison, we also tested if cells grown on cellulose behaved similarly (Fig. 7B).
In all cases, the PCD after exposure to insoluble substrate (Fig. 7, dotted lines) were lower than the PCD of cells exposed to buffer alone (Fig. 7, solid lines), indicating that C. bescii cells were attaching to xylan and cellulose, as expected. Surprisingly, while the attachment of C. bescii cells to xylan after growth on xylan (26% attachment [Fig. 7A]) was expected, a higher proportion of cells were capable of attachment to cellulose after growth on xylan (69% attachment [Fig. 7C]). Moreover, when cells were exposed to both rCbPilA and substrate (Fig. 7A to C) the PCD increased, indicating that the presence of rCbPilA during the attachment process was inhibiting the ability of cells to interact with the substrate. We observed a 3.3-fold decrease in cell attachment to xylan (Fig. 7A), compared to a 2-fold decrease in cell attachment to cellulose (Fig. 7C). As expected, when C. bescii was incubated with substrates at elevated temperatures (75°C), we observed an increase in cells attached to xylan and cellulose compared to data collected at 25°C, and with the addition of rCbPilA, cell attachment was decreased 6- and 24-fold for xylan and cellulose, respectively (Table S3).
Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was then used to test for interaction effects between our independent variables, substrate and protein (Table S4). The interaction between treatments (substrate and CbPilA) was statistically significant, with P values below 0.05 (Table S4). This interaction was also specific, as a control protein, bovine serum albumin (BSA), did not interfere with attachment, based on a lack of statistical interaction in this experiment (Fig. 7D; Table S4). As an additional test of specificity between C. bescii cells and polysaccharides, we tested the ability of two different strains of Escherichia coli cultured in defined medium to adhere to xylan or cellulose (Table S5). In both cases, no significant decrease in E. coli PCD was observed, supporting the specificity of the cell attachment assay. By extension, our data support the idea that CbPilA plays an integral role in cellular attachment to xylan, but additional mechanisms, such as the tāpirins, are involved in cellular attachment to crystalline cellulose.
To further confirm the role of CbPilA in attachment to plant polysaccharides like xylan and cellulose, we also tested if anti-CbPilA antibodies could neutralize CbPilA binding sites and interfere with the ability of planktonic cells to adhere to xylan or cellulose. Cells cultured on xylan were tested for the ability to adhere to xylan or cellulose when incubated with increasing concentrations of anti-CbPilA antibody serum. Preincubation of cells with anti-CbPilA antibodies was sufficient to interrupt cell adhesion and resulted in up to 1.75-fold and 2.2-fold increases in PCD in the presence of xylan and cellulose, respectively (Fig. 8). These data are in line with data from cell binding assays (Fig. 7) and further support the role of C. bescii T4P in attachment to plant polysaccharides like xylan and cellulose.
DISCUSSION Here, we present an initial functional characterization of the Gram-negative-like major pilin from C. bescii. Similar to other members of the class Clostridia (24, 29), the C. bescii genome contains the genes required to produce a Gram-negative-like T4P in a single locus (Fig. 1A) that is likely arranged as an operon (Table S1). Initial bioinformatics analyses identified five putative pilin genes located in the C. bescii T4P locus (Table 1). Pathogenic Firmicutes, such as Streptococcus sanguinis (47, 48) and C. perfringens (28), also encode multiple pilins in their respective T4P loci, and a hypervirulent C. difficile strain encodes as many as nine pilins distributed across five genomic loci (30). Additionally, based on amino acid sequence homology, concatenated C. bescii pilin sequences cluster with other T4P loci from the majority of strongly cellulolytic Caldicellulosiruptor species (Fig. 1B).
Based on our phylogenetic analysis, and analysis of publicly available proteomics data (10), we hypothesized that the C. bescii T4P is likely used to facilitate cell attachment to polysaccharides found in plant biomass. To test this hypothesis, we first used transcriptomics and proteomics data (Table 2) to identify the C. bescii major pilin (CbPilA) for molecular cloning and analysis. We sought to determine if members of the noncellulosomal genus Caldicellulosiruptor used T4P to facilitate attachment to plant polysaccharides, similar to observations for cellulosomal members of the genus Ruminococcus (26, 49). In contrast to R. flavefaciens or F. succinogenes, which produced pilin during growth on cellulose (23, 24) and/or glucose (23), we observed that the highest CbPilA production was observed during growth on xylan in comparison to glucomannan, xylose (Fig. 3), cellulose, or pectin (data not shown), implying that xylan is the main inducer of T4P locus expression in C. bescii. Using immunofluorescent detection of CbPilA, we were able to confirm that production of CbPilA is induced by xylan (Fig. 5B) but not xylose (Fig. 5E). This is not completely unsurprising, considering that after cellulose, xylan is the second most common polysaccharide present in secondary plant cell walls (50). Response to soluble xylooligosaccharides in carbon-limited biotopes would be a likely adaptation to sense plant biomass in terrestrial hot springs. For example, Hungateiclostridium thermocellum (formerly Clostridium thermocellum) produces extracytoplasmic factor anti-sigma factors that upregulate certain cellulosome-related genes encoding enzymes in response to soluble xylooligosaccharides in its environment (51, 52). Unlike in previous proteomics studies, we could not detect any extracellular CbPilA from cells grown on cellulose using immuno-dot blots, but this discrepancy with prior data may be explained by the use of complex media in the prior studies (4, 10, 35). In this study, we cultured C. bescii on a chemically defined medium, ensuring that the tested polysaccharide was the only available carbon source. The level of amino acid sequence diversity observed among pilins from the genus Caldicellulosiruptor (Fig. 1B) may also translate to differential genetic regulation of T4P loci. For example, the highly cellulolytic species C. changbaiensis failed to adhere to xylan when used in cell binding assays (42) and likely deploys a T4P in response to other signals, or alternately, its pilin proteins are not involved in attachment to polysaccharides. C. changbaiensis was one of the highly divergent cellulolytic species (Fig. 1B) on the basis of pilin amino acid sequence, so it is not surprising that it would display attachment properties different from those of C. bescii.
In addition to identifying xylan as the inducing polysaccharide for CbPilA production, we demonstrated in vitro the adsorption of rCbPilA to xylan with polysaccharide pulldown assays (Fig. 4) and immunofluorescence micrographs (Fig. 5H). While microcrystalline cellulose did not induce production of native CbPilA, rCbPilA was capable of interacting with cellulose (Fig. 4), similar to observations that a pilin protein from R. albus 8 is involved in attachment to cellulose (25). As expected from a thermostable protein, we detected an interaction between rCbPilA and xylan at 75°C but not 25°C (Fig. 4); however, this was in contrast to our observations that planktonic C. bescii cells were capable of adhering to xylan and cellulose at either 25°C or 75°C (Table S3) and anti-CbPilA antibody neutralization at 25°C was sufficient to interrupt C. bescii cell adhesion to xylan and cellulose (Fig. 7). These results suggest that physiological temperatures favor adsorption of rCbPilA to carbohydrates, potentially due to increased flexibility of rCbPilA at higher temperatures or reduced avidity of rCbPilA in comparison to assembled T4P at lower temperatures; alternatively, rCbPilA assumes a modified conformation due to its N-terminal truncation but remains capable of adsorbing to polysaccharides at higher temperatures. The likelihood of structural differences between rCbPilA and native CbPilA are low, since anti-CbPilA antibodies raised against rCbPilA interact with epitopes involved in polysaccharide binding (Fig. 7). Regardless, our in vitro data support an adhesive role for the major C. bescii pilin, CbPilA.
Although we demonstrated in vitro that rCbPilA can adsorb to xylan (Fig. 4 and 5H) and cellulose (Fig. 4), our goal was to determine whether CbPilA played a direct role in C. bescii cell attachment to these polysaccharides. This scenario was likely since C. bescii cells are capable of attaching to xylan or cellulose (Fig. 7) and CbPilA was detected at the cell surface using immuno-dot blots of whole cells (Fig. 3) or immunofluorescence microscopy with xylan-grown cells (Fig. 5C). Attachment of C. bescii cells to polysaccharides was, in part, mediated by CbPilA in a specific manner, as we observed a decrease in adhered cells to xylan or cellulose after supplementation with rCbPilA (Fig. 7) or anti-CbPilA antibody neutralization (Fig. 8). The reduction in C. bescii attachment to polysaccharides after anti-CbPilA antibody neutralization (Fig. 8) further supports the idea that CbPilA is located to the cell surface. It is also likely that the observed inhibition of cell attachment to xylan (Fig. 7A) is correlated with rCbPilA binding to xylan, as observed in Fig. 5I, and blocking of available binding sites for native CbPilA. T4P-mediated attachment to the plant polysaccharide cellulose was previously demonstrated by members of the genus Ruminococcus (26, 49). Here, we are expanding the adhesive role for T4P to include the polysaccharide xylan in an extremely thermophilic bacterial system.
Taken together, our in vitro and in vivo data provide evidence that the T4 pilin CbPilA plays a direct role in C. bescii adherence to xylan. While other members of the genus Caldicellulosiruptor produce an S-layer-located xylanase that facilitates cell attachment to xylan (9), C. bescii lacks this gene and instead uses T4P to adhere to xylan (Fig. 9). In addition, CbPilA may coordinate cell adherence to cellulose along with the tāpirins (19, 22), and we propose a model in which cell adhesion to cellulose involves both proteins (Fig. 9). A similar mechanism has been recently described for a T4b pilus from enterotoxicogenic E. coli, where a secreted adhesin (CofJ) protein functions as a type of “scout” that first associates with receptors on the host cell and subsequently interacts with minor pilins present at the tip of the T4b pilus (53). Future studies to confirm the interaction of tāpirin proteins with T4 pilins from the genus Caldicellulosiruptor are under way. Overall, our data support the idea that the extremely thermophilic genus Caldicellulosiruptor deploys T4 pilins to adhere to insoluble polysaccharides.
MATERIALS AND METHODS Identification of pilin genes from C. bescii and bioinformatics analysis. Putative pilin genes in C. bescii were identified using the Joint Genome Institute Integrated Microbial Genomes (IMG) database (54). Functional annotation of the predicted amino acid sequences for each pilin used the Pfam database (55) available within IMG. Signal peptides were predicted by the SignalP 4.1 Server (56), and transmembrane domains were predicted using TMHMM, version 2.0 (57). Hairpin sequences that may serve as transcriptional terminators were identified using TransTermHP (58). BLASTp, hosted within the IMG database, was used to identify Caldicellulosiruptor orthologs to the five pilins encoded in the C. bescii T4P operon (54, 59). Amino acid sequences of orthologs were aligned using MUSCLE (60) hosted on the EMBL-EBI server (61). Sequence Matrix (https://github.com/gaurav/taxondna) was used to concatenate the amino acid alignments prior to the generation of a phylogenetic tree. IQ-TREE (62) along with substitution model selection by ModelFinder (63) was used to generate a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, which was tested by 1,000 bootstraps using UFBoot (64), all of which were hosted by the Los Alamos National Laboratory (https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/IQTREE/iqtree.html). Secondary structures of putative C. bescii pilins were predicted using the PSIPRED program, version 3.3 (65).
Media, growth conditions, and estimation of cell densities. Minimal, low-osmolality defined (LOD) medium (66) was used for culturing C. bescii DSM 6725 strains on various carbon sources. C. bescii DSM 6725 was provided by Robert M. Kelly (North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC). C. bescii cultures were grown at 75°C under anaerobic conditions with one of the following substrates, all at 1 g liter−1: xylose, Sigmacell (20 μm; Sigma), xylan (beechwood; Sigma), and glucomannan (konjac root; NOW Foods). Epifluorescence microscopy (Nikon Eclipse E400) was used to enumerate glutaraldehyde-fixed cells stained with acridine orange as previously described (67).
Escherichia coli was maintained on LB medium supplemented with antibiotics (25 mg liter−1 of kanamycin and 34 mg liter−1 of chloramphenicol) for plasmid maintenance or ZYM-5052 autoinduction medium supplemented with 50 mg liter−1 kanamycin and 34 mg liter−1 chloramphenicol (68) for protein production. For cell binding assays, E. coli was cultured on glucose M9 minimal medium (6 g liter−1 of Na2HPO4, 3 g liter−1 of KH2PO4, 0.5 g liter−1 of NaCl, 1 g liter−1 of NH4Cl, 1 mM MgSO4·7H2O, 0.1 mM CaCl2, and 2 g liter−1 of glucose). Cell densities of E. coli cultures were measured as optical density at 600 nm (OD600) by a spectrophotometer.
Production and purification of recombinant proteins. Soluble protein was produced from truncated cbpilA (nucleotides 112 to 438; GenBank accession number WP_015908263.1). Molecular cloning into pET-28b used restriction enzyme sites NcoI and XhoI incorporated into oligonucleotide primer sequences (forward primer, CGCCATATGCAAGTATTAAAACAGATAAAC; reverse primer, GCTACTCGAGTTACTTGTAGTTTGGATCTGG; restriction enzyme sites are underlined). Soluble rCbPilA was produced from a truncation mutant that eliminated the prepilin-type N-terminal cleavage sequence and a region encoding the α-1N helix (Fig. S2). All minor pilins were cloned into pET-28b using Gibson Assembly, per the manufacturer’s protocols (New England BioLabs [NEB]). Soluble recombinant C. bescii minor pilins Athe_1881 (GenBank accession number WP_015908264.1; forward primer, CTGGTGCCGCGCGGCAGCCAATTAAAGAATATAAATAAGGCAAGAAAG, and reverse primer, AGTGGTGGTGGTGGTGGTGCTTAGTAACCAGGATCAACATTTG), Athe_1877 (GenBank accession number WP_015908260.1), Athe_1876 (GenBank accession number WP_015908259.1), and recombinant C. bescii tāpirin (rCbtāpirin; Athe_1871 [GenBank accession number YP_002573732]; forward primer, CTGGTGCCGCGCGGCAGCCATATGTTAGCATCGCTGAACCAG, and reverse primer, AGTGGTGGTGGTGGTGGTGCTCGAGCTACCTTGTAACCATGTTTC) were cloned, produced, purified, and dialyzed similarly to rCbPilA. All recombinant pilins were produced with an N-terminal histidine tag for immobilized nickel affinity purification using 1-ml HisTrap columns (GE Healthcare) per the manufacturer’s protocol. Autoinduction medium (68) supplemented with 50 mg liter−1 of kanamycin and 34 mg liter−1 of chloramphenicol was used for growth of Escherichia coli Rosetta (Novagen) to induce protein production. Purity of recombinant pilin proteins was confirmed by SDS-PAGE (4 to 15% gradient gel; Bio-Rad) after dialysis against 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4) using SnakeSkin dialysis tubing (Thermo Scientific) per the manufacturer’s protocol. The final concentration of recombinant C. bescii pilins was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA; Thermo Scientific) per the manufacturer’s protocol.
Western blotting. rCbPilA and C. bescii minor pilins Athe_1881, Athe_1877, and Athe_1876 were purified as described above, and the histidine tags were cleaved off using thrombin. For thrombin cleavage, all proteins were dialyzed in thrombin cleavage buffer (Tris-HCl at 50 mM and NaCl at 20 mM, pH 8.0) and incubated with 15 μl of the thrombin beads per mg of the respective protein for 7 h at room temperature, followed by overnight at 4°C with gentle shaking on an orbital shaker for the entire incubation period. Complete cleavage of the proteins was confirmed using SDS-PAGE, and purified uncleaved recombinant pilins as well as thrombin-cleaved recombinant proteins were further analyzed. Heat-treated cell lysate from E. coli transformed with pET-28b(+) was used as a negative control. All protein fractions were normalized to a concentration of 30 μM and resolved on an SDS-PAGE gel (Bio-Rad). Proteins were transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (5.5 cm by 8.5 cm) in a transfer cassette at 20 V overnight at 4°C. Membranes were incubated with a 1:120 dilution of custom polyclonal primary antibody (chicken anti-CbPilA; GeneTel Laboratories LLC) and a 1:1,000 dilution of horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated rabbit anti-chicken IgY secondary antibody (ImmunoReagents). The secondary antibody was detected via enhanced chemiluminescence (Clarity Western ECL substrate; Bio-Rad). Membranes were imaged (ChemiDoc touch imaging system; Bio-Rad) using standard chemiluminescent settings and analyzed using Image Lab 5.2.1 (Bio-Rad). A 30 μM concentration of each thrombin-cleaved pilin was also analyzed on separate immuno-dot blots with anti-CbPilA antibody dilutions used for immuno-dot blots (1:1,000, for monitoring CbPilA production) described below as well as for immunofluorescence assays (1:120).
Immuno-dot blots. Actively growing cultures of C. bescii on plant polysaccharides xylan, glucomannan, cellulose, and the sugar xylose were sampled throughout growth until cultures reached stationary phase. Planktonic cells in growth medium were sampled at early exponential growth, mid-exponential growth, and late exponential growth and diluted 1:1 with sterile glycerol prior to storage at –20°C until further use. These cell samples were used in the immuno-dot blots without any additional processing. Purified rCbPilA was applied on each membrane as a standard curve for quantitative immunoblot analysis. PVDF membranes used for protein immobilization (Amersham Hybond 0.2 PVDF; GE) were prewet with 100% methanol per the manufacturer’s instructions and then equilibrated in 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Samples were applied to the prewetted membrane blocked in PBS-T blocking buffer (PBS with 0.1% [vol/vol] Tween 20 and 5% [wt/vol] milk) for 1 h on an orbital shaker. Afterwards, the membrane was rinsed with PBS-T washing buffer and then incubated with primary antibody (chicken anti-CbPilA; GeneTel) diluted 1:1,000 in PBS-T. Then the membrane was washed in PBS-T, followed by incubation with secondary antibody (rabbit anti-chicken HRP conjugate; ImmunoReagents) diluted 1:1,000 in PBS-T. The membrane was then washed in PBS-T prior to chemiluminescent imaging following methods described above for Western blotting. All incubation steps and washing were conducted at room temperature. Three independent replicates were blotted for each time point. Cell densities determined while plotting growth curves were used to calculate the number of cells applied to the membrane at each time point. Standard curves (R2 = 0.98) were built using dilutions of purified rCbPilA (1 ng μl−1, 10 ng μl−1, 50 ng μl−1, 100 ng μl−1, and 200 ng μl−1) in Image Lab 5.2.1 (Bio-Rad). Native CbPilA concentrations in the samples were determined using rCbPilA standards, then normalized to the number of cells, and compared using a two-sample t test in R studio statistical software (69) (v.3.3.3).
Immunofluorescence microscopy. Immunolabeling of C. bescii cells followed the methods of Conway et al. (9), with modifications. C. bescii cells were grown on 50 ml of LOD medium in 125-ml serum bottles with either xylan or xylose as the carbon source and harvested at late exponential phase. Residual xylan was separated from the cells, and cells were subsequently pelleted using centrifugation at 5,000 × g for 10 min at room temperature (same conditions for all of the centrifugation steps). Anti-CbPilA polyclonal antibodies were raised in egg-laying chicken hens (chicken anti-CbPilA; GeneTel) and used as the primary antibody at a 1:120 dilution. The secondary antibody was a goat anti-chicken IgY polyclonal antibody conjugated to DyLight 488 (Novus Biologicals) used at a 1:400 dilution. After the primary antibody was washed, CbPilA was labeled with the secondary antibody at room temperature for an hour, followed by staining of cells with 1 μg/ml of 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) in 1× PBS for 5 min at 4°C. After the final washing step, cells were vacuum filtered onto 0.2-μm polycarbonate track etched membrane filters (GVS Life Sciences) and mounted in Vectashield mounting medium for imaging (Vector Laboratories). Epifluorescence imaging was done with a Nikon eclipse E400 microscope, and images were captured using an Infinity 3 Lumenera camera. DAPI and DyLight 488 images were merged into a color composite image using Image-Pro Insight software 9.1 (Media Cybernetics). Secondary control images were captured from secondary antibody-labeled samples which were not incubated with the primary antibody. Biomass controls (uninoculated xylan in LOD) were processed with both primary and secondary antibodies. Xylan was incubated with 30 μM rCbPilA at 75°C for an hour, similar to the case with the polysaccharide pulldown assay, and then probed with primary and secondary antibodies and imaged as the other samples. Brightness and offset of DAPI (blue) and DyLight 488 (green) channels were balanced in the color composite images using Image-Pro Insight 9.1. All assays had biological triplicates. Scale bars at the bottom of each image represent 8 μm.
Polysaccharide pulldown assays. Substrates (cellulose or xylan) used in all polysaccharide pulldown assays were washed with distilled water five times, followed by 16 h of air drying, and then kept at 70°C for 2 h. Substrate (100 mg ml−1) was incubated with rCbPilA (30 μM) in the binding buffer, 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.2), and incubated in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) at 700 rpm for 1 h at 25°C or 75°C. Insoluble substrates were pelleted by centrifugation for 1 min (15,000 × g). The supernatant (∼70 μl) represented unbound protein. Pelleted substrate was washed with 1 ml of the binding buffer five times. After the final wash, the pellet was resuspended in 70 μl of binding buffer representing the bound protein. Both the bound and unbound fractions were analyzed using SDS-PAGE.
Cell attachment assays. C. bescii cell cultures were grown to early stationary phase supplemented with either xylan or cellulose (1 g liter−1) and harvested at 5,000 × g for 10 min at room temperature. Cells were resuspended in 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.2) to a density of 109 ml−1. The experimental design used for analysis of the cell attachment assays is illustrated in Fig. 6. Each experimental condition consisted of a total volume of 1.2 ml comprised of 1 ml of C. bescii cells and 0.2 ml of either rCbPilA (30 μM), BSA (30 μM), or buffer. Washed xylan or cellulose (100 mg ml−1, as described above) was added to the experimental conditions, and no binding substrate was added to the negative controls. All binding assays were incubated at room temperature or 75°C with gentle rotary shaking at 100 rpm for 1 h. After incubation, planktonic cells were enumerated using epifluorescence microscopy as described above. Each of the four treatments in all cell binding assays were replicated a minimum of three times. Results from each experiment were analyzed with two-way ANOVA, using the functions “lm” and “Anova” in program R (70). Each model tested for main and interactive effects of binding substrate (presence or absence of xylan or cellulose) and protein (presence or absence of rCbPilA or BSA) on the planktonic cell density (Fig. 6). In this modeling framework, the significance of the interaction term (substrate × protein) indicates whether the presence of the protein (rCbPilA or BSA) influenced the binding affinity of cells to the substrate (xylan or cellulose).
As an additional negative control, E. coli strain NEB10β or BL21 was cultured overnight in glucose M9 minimal medium (6 g liter−1 of Na2HPO4, 3 g liter−1 of KH2PO4, 0.5 g liter−1 of NaCl, 1 g liter−1 of NH4Cl, 1 mM MgSO4·7H2O, 0.1 mM CaCl2, and 2 g liter−1 of glucose). Cells were harvested as described above for C. bescii, washed once in binding buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate [pH 7.2]), and resuspended to an approximate OD600 of 1.0. Cell binding to washed xylan or cellulose followed the same protocol as for C. bescii, with two exceptions: the absence of rCbPilA was used as an experimental condition, and planktonic cell densities were measured in 96-well polystyrene plates using a microplate reader (Biotek Epoch). Each experimental condition was replicated a minimum of three times.
Cell attachment assays with antibody neutralization. Antibody neutralization assays followed the method of Mahmoud and Koval (71), with modifications. rCbPilA was replaced with dilutions of polyclonal anti-CbPilA. Cells were grown and harvested as described above and incubated with a 1:50 or 1:10 dilution of anti-CbPilA fpor experimental conditions, and similar dilutions of preimmune chicken serum served as the negative control. Both control and treated cells were incubated with and without insoluble xylan or cellulose and enumerated using epifluorescence microscopy as described above. Each treatment in all cell binding assays had three biological replicates. Average planktonic cell densities for each treatment were compared using one-way ANOVA, using the functions “lm” and “Anova” in program R (70) followed by post hoc Tukey HSD (honestly significant difference) tests using R software (70).