https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2020.03.023
Title: Genome sequence and comparative analysis of DRQ-2, the type strain of Nonomuraea indica
Abstract: Strain DRQ-2 T (type strain of Nonomuraea indica ) is worthy for genome sequencing, due to its ability to produce a wide variety of industrially important enzymes such as amylase, asparaginase, cellulase, gelatinase, glutaminase, and protease. Genome sequencing and comparison of strain DRQ-2
T is described in the present work. The genome size was estimated to be 8,288,417 (bp) that consisted of 59 contigs. The G + C content of the genome was 72.4%. A total of 7730 genes were predicted with two rRNAs and 64 tRNAs. The genome analysis of the strain DRQ-2
T showed the presence of a wide range of secondary metabolite gene clusters. Pan-Genomes Analysis Pipeline (PGAP) indicated that strain DRQ-2
T had large numbers of unique genes. The majority of N. indica DRQ-2 T genes encode for hypothetical proteins, indicating the functions of these ortholog clusters were still remain to be determined.
Introduction The genus Nonomuraea, belongs to the family Streptosporangiaceae, was originally proposed by Zhang et al., [ 1 ] as Nonomuria to commemorate a Japanese taxonomist who was involved in the characterization of actinobacteria [ 2 ]. Based on the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria, the genus name was corrected to Nonomuraea [ 3 ]. Members of this genus are aerobic, Gram-stain-positive, non-acid-fast, and non-motile with an extensively branched substrate and/or aerial mycelia that further differentiate into hooked, spiral or straight chains of spores [ 4 ]. Members of this genus are widely distributed, have been isolated from various sources such as soil [ 4 ], mangrove sediment [ 5 ], peat swamp forest soil [ 6 ], the rhizosphere [ 7 ], and plants [ 8 , 9 ]. At the time of writing, the genus Nonomuraea contains 50 validly described species [ 10 ]. During the investigation on the diversity of actinobacteria from soils of a lime-stone open-pit mine, the strain designated DRQ-2 T was isolated by one of our group members. Based on phenotypic, chemotaxonomic and phylogenetic data, strain DRQ-2 T was proposed as a new species in the genus Nonomuraea , for which the name Nonomuraea indica has been proposed [ 11 ]. Novel strain DRQ-2 T produces a wide variety of enzymes such as amylase, asparaginase, cellulase, gelatinase, glutaminase, and protease [ 11 ]. In the present study, we sequenced and compared the genome of N. indica DRQ-2 T for better understanding its genome makeup.
Materials and methods N. indica DRQ-2 T was cultured on starch–casein agar incubated at 45 °C. The biomass was collected and the genomic DNA for genome sequencing (WGS) was carried out using the sodium dodecyl sulfate-cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (SDS-CTAB) method [ 12 ]. Genome sequencing of N. indica DRQ-2 T was performed using a paired-end sequencing method on HiSeq 2000 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The draft genome was assembled with the SOAPdenovo2 package [ 13 ].
Sequences were annotated using NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/annotation_prok/ ) and Rapid Annotation System Technology (RAST) pipeline [ 14 ]. The genome was mined using antiSMASH 3.0 [ 15 ]. The identification of tRNAs and rRNAs was carried out using tRNAscan-SE (version 1.23) [ 16 ] and RNAmmer (version 1.2) [ 17 ].
To identify the lists of shared and unique gene clusters, N. indica DRQ-2 T was compared with genomes of Nonomuraea coxensis DSM 45129, Nonomuraea solani CGMCC 4.7037, Nonomuraea pusilla DSM 43357, and Nonomuraea maritima CGMCC 4.5681 available at NCBI database. Pan-genome analysis was performed using Pan-Genomes Analysis Pipeline (PGAP) [ 18 ]. The orthologous gene clusters were identified by the Gene Family (GF) method set to its default parameters.
Results and discussion The draft genome of N. indica DRQ-2 T has a total size of 8,288,417 (bp) with 59 contigs. The genomic DNA G + C content was 72.4%. A total of 7730 genes were predicted with two rRNAs and 64 tRNAs. A detailed comparison of genome features of N. indica DRQ-2 T and other members of Nonomuraea were listed in Table 1 . RAST functional annotation ( Fig. 1 ) revealed that the genome of N. indica DRQ-2 T has 650 genes for carbohydrate metabolism, 339 genes for protein metabolism, and 142 genes involved in DNA metabolism. N. indica DRQ-2 T was isolated from limestone open pit mine [ 11 ], this environment often has harsh environment conditions. The genome of N. indica DRQ-2 T showed the presence of stress response genes (147), especially the genes for oxidative and osmotic stress. Reports suggest that oxidative stress signals may come from the environment [ 19 ].
Although, N. indica DRQ-2 T was isolated from limestone open-pit mine, but the genome showed the presence of plant hormone especially for auxin biosynthesis. The genome of N. indica DRQ-2 T has a wide range of secondary metabolite gene clusters including terpene, terpene-t1pks, and saccharide. PGAP analysis ( Fig. 2 ) indicated that each of Nonomuraea species contains large numbers of unique genes in their genomes may be due to their involvement in genome-specific metabolic mechanisms for environmental adaptation. The pan-genome of the Nonomuraea species comprised of 17,535 clusters including 3303 homologous gene-clusters in the core genome. The number of shared gene-clusters between each pair varied highly. The majority of N. indica DRQ-2 T genes encode for hypothetical proteins, indicating the functions of these ortholog clusters were still remain to be determined. The whole-genome shotgun project has been deposited in GenBank under the accession number PJOK00000000.