https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2020.06.040
Title: Comparative genome analysis provides shreds of molecular evidence for reclassification of Leuconostoc mesenteroides MTCC 10508 as a strain of Leu. suionicum
Abstract: This study presents the whole-genome comparative analysis of a Leuconostoc sp. strain, previously documented as
Leu. mesenteroides MTCC 10508. The ANI, dDDH, dot plot, and MAUVE analyses suggested its reclassification as a strain of
Leu. suionicum . Functional annotation identified a total of 1971 genes, out of which, 265 genes were mapped to CAZymes, evincing its carbohydrate transforming capability. The genome comparison with 59
Leu. mesenteroides and Leu. suionicum strains generated the core and pan-genome profiles, divulging the unique genes in
Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508. For the first time, this study reports the genes encoding alpha-xylosidase and copper oxidase in a strain of
Leu. suionicum . The genetic information for any possible allergenic molecule could not be detected in the genome, advocating the safety of the strain. The present investigation provides the genomic evidence for reclassification of the
Leuconostoc sp. strain and also promulgates the molecular insights into its metabolic potential. Introduction
Leuconostoc sp. is a lactic acid bacteria (LAB) belonging to Leuconostocaceae family. The members of this genus are natural inhabitants of fresh meat, milk, dairy, plant, and fermented fruit and vegetable products [1,2] . They are equipped with extensive biocatalytic properties of carbohydrate transformation to execute fermentation processes. The role of many Leuconostoc bacterial strains has been identified in the fermentation and food industries. The genus is considered reasonably safe for its use in edible products and has been accorded “generally recognized as safe” (GRAS) status [2] . The characteristic features of Leuconostoc genus are gram-positive staining, chains or pairs of coccobacillus, catalase-negative, 37–38% G+C content in the genome, and facultative anaerobic [2] .
A total of 16 species have been identified in Leuconostoc genus. Leu. mesenteroides includes 11 subspecies, and those are further classified into 84 strains. Out of the 84 strains, the complete genome sequence is available for 19 strains in the public repository to date (June 01, 2020). Based on the 16S rRNA gene sequence, which is considered as a phylogenetic marker for taxonomic distribution of bacterial species, Leu. suionicum was previously designated as Leu. mesenteroides subsp. suionicum [3] . The advancements in sequencing technologies facilitated the whole-genome comparison among the strains of Leu. mesenteroides subsp. suionicum and the other subspecies of Leu. mesenteroides . The two parameters, average nucleotide index (ANI) and digital DNA-DNA hybridization (dDDH), are widely accepted criteria for species classification [4] . The genome sequences of Leu. mesenteroides strains share 95–99% ANI and a minimum of 70% dDDH values, which are higher than the thresholds defined for determining the status of a species. On the contrary, the genome sequence of Leu. mesenteroides subsp . suionicum shares less than 94.1% ANI and less than 57% dDDH value with that of Leu. mesenteroides strains. Therefore, Leu. mesenteroides subsp. suionicum has been reclassified and accorded the species status, i.e., Leu. suionicum [5] .
So far, several Leu. mesenteroides , and Leu. suionicum strains have been characterized for the production of polysaccharides such as glucans, fructans, and oligosaccharides [6,7] . The enzyme, dextransucrase, catalyzes the biosynthesis of the glucose polymer, dextran, and glucooligosaccharides, taking sucrose as substrate [8] . Levansucrase enzyme makes the polymer of fructose, levan, and fructooligosaccharides from sucrose. These metabolites have significant biological and processing properties, and therefore, are desirable biomolecules in food, pharma, and cosmetic industries [9] . Dextran is a glucan polysaccharide made up of (1 → 6)-linked α- d -glucopyranosyl units. The viscosifying, emulsifying, and stabilizing attributes of dextran makes it a desirable food ingredient [10] . The β (2–6) linked polymer of fructose, levan, is a preferred thickener and emulsifier agent in food applications [11] . Besides this, these polymers and their oligomer types have the potential to selectively stimulate the gut probiotic microflora [9] . In our previous studies, we have characterized dextransucrase and levansucrase enzymes from a Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 strain (documented as Leu. mesenteroides MTCC 10508 in the depository) for the biosynthesis of the dextran, levan, and oligosaccharides, utilizing the sucrose biomass [12–16] . In the present study, genome sequencing, assembly, and in-depth analysis of the draft genome of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 have been performed. The pan and core genomes of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 were compared with the corresponding genomic sequences of 59 strains of Leu. mesenteroides and Leu. suionicum , affirming an appropriate taxonomic status to the strain. Functional profiling of the whole genome data was performed. Furthermore, genes from pan and core genomes were cloned and sequenced for validation of in silico assembly.
Materials and methods Media and growth conditions The Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 strain (documented as Leu. mesenteroides MTCC 10508 in the depository) was procured from Microbial Type Culture Collection and Gene Bank (MTCC), IMTECH, Chandigarh, India. The strain was revived and cultured in a sterile MRS medium at 30 °C for 12 h, as explained previously [12] .
DNA isolation, sequencing, and assembly The bacterial cells were harvested in sterile tubes by centrifugation. The cells were washed and suspended in lysis buffer. Genomic DNA was isolated from the bacterial cells by using the Thermo-Scientific GeneJET Kit (Waltham, Massachusetts, United States), following the manufacturer's protocol. Agarose gel electrophoresis was used to check the DNA quality. The concentration and purity of DNA were measured using Thermo-Scientific Nanodrop one (Waltham, Massachusetts, United States). The genomic DNA was sequenced using the Illumina NextSeq 500 platform, following the standard protocols ( http://www.illumina.com/ ). The whole-genome sequencing (WGS) generated paired-end reads. The raw reads were processed using NGSQCToolkit_v2.3, and the low quality reads with a Phred score <20 were discarded. The high-quality reads were assembled by Velvet_1.2.10 [17] at the hash length of 75 bp. VelvetOptimiser was run to obtain this optimum hash value for assembly. SSPACE_standard_3.0 tool [18] was used for scaffolding the assembled contigs. The gap closing was performed using GapCloser-bin-v1-12-r6 [19] . QUAST 5.0.2 [20] was used for assembly validation. The assembled sequence was given as input in the BRIG tool for the pictorial presentation of the constructed whole genome.
Phylogenetic analysis The high-quality reads were mapped on the 16S rRNA database of NCBI. The predicted 16S rRNA genes were submitted to EZbiocloud [21] , which is a public repository focused on the taxonomic analysis of bacteria and archaea. By using 16S rRNA sequences of Leu. mesenteroides and Leu. suionicum strains, a phylogenetic tree was constructed following the neighbor-joining method via molecular evolutionary genetics analysis (MEGA) 7.0 software [22] . A whole-genome level comparison was performed among Leu. mesenteroides , and Leu. suionicum strains, and phylogenetic relation was obtained using Phylophlan tool [23] .
ANI and dDDH analysis Average nucleotide identity (ANI) and digital DNA-DNA hybridization (dDDH) approaches were followed for taxonomic assignment. ANI analysis was performed using JSpeciesWS tool [24] ; whereas, dDDH analysis was done by using GGDC Genome-to-Genome Distance Calculator 2.1 [25] .
Genome annotation Rapid Annotation using Subsystems Technology (RAST) server [26] was used for predicting total Protein Encoding Gene (PEG). The prophage regions in the genome were predicted using the Phaster server. The IS Finder software ( http://issaga.biotoul.fr/issaga_index.php ) was used to predict the insertion sequence (IS) elements. Genomic islands and pathogenic islands were analyzed using the IslandViewer4 tool [27] , which discloses the regions with evidence of horizontal transfer. For pathway analysis, the complete genome was mapped to the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, http://www.kegg.jp/ ) and Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG ) databases at the default parameters. In order to mine the carbohydrate active enzymes, the genomic data was aligned to Carbohydrate Active Enzymes (CAZy) database [28] using BLASTx algorithm at the stringent criteria of ≥70% protein sequence identity, ≥70% subject coverage, and the e-value cut-off of 10e-5. Pathosystems Resource Integration Center (PATRIC) tool was used to determine antibiotic resistance genes. Antimicrobial activity related genes were analyzed by running BLASTx against all the bacteriocins present in nr-NCBI database at default parameters. The presence of virulence factors in the genome was assessed by doing BLASTx against the virulence factor genome database ( http://www.mgc.ac.cn/VFs/main.htm ).
Comparative genomics Bacterial Pan Genome Analysis (BPGA) pipeline [29] was used to compare the core and pan genomic regions of different Leu. mesenteroides , and Leu. suionicum strains. The genomes sharing more than 95% identity on the basis of ANI or dDDH analysis were compared by generating dot-plot matrices using RAST server. These dot plots signify the conserved regions among the genomes by doing the pairwise alignment. These strains were further compared on the basis of functional annotation provided by RAST server.
The genomic contigs were reassembled using MAUVE software [30] . The complete genome of Leu. suionicum DSM 20241 available in NCBI database was taken as a reference genome. After reassembly, the constructed whole genome was aligned with the closely related genomic sequences (sharing more than 95% ANI or dDDH value) by using the progressive Mauve tool. The Mauve alignments and dot plot matrices predicted the rearrangements in the genome, including insertion, inversion, and translocation events.
Assembly validation Two selected putative genes, one from the core genome and the other from the pan-genome, involved in carbohydrate metabolism pathways, were amplified using the genomic DNA as a template. The sequence-specific primers were generated using sequencing data of the assembled genome. The PCR amplicons were cloned in pJET1.2 plasmid vector (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and sequenced. The sequences of the cloned and predicted DNA fragments were matched using the Clustal Omega Multiple Sequence Alignment tool [31] .
Results and discussion Leuconostoc genus is a member of the heterologous group of bacteria, which were traditionally known as lactic acid bacteria (LAB). The bacterial species under the LAB category are majorly involved in the food and fermentation industries. Many strains have been identified for prebiotic molecule production [9,12,32–34] . Some of the Leuconostoc sp. strains have been demonstrated as potential probiotics [35–37] . The strain, Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508, is equipped with enzymes for prebiotic molecule biosynthesis, as demonstrated in our previous reports [9,12] . It exhibits the morphology of cocci, with single, paired, or short-chain colonies, the characteristic feature of the Leuconostoc genus ( Fig. S1 ). This strain was documented as Leu. mesenteroides MTCC 10508 in the microbial culture depository, MTCC ( https://mtccindia.res.in/ ). The present study presents an in-depth whole-genome analysis of the strain, Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508.
Sequencing, assembly, and annotation The whole-genome sequencing generated a total of 1,39,77,478 paired-end raw reads, out of which 97.8% reads, with >20 Phred score, were considered as high quality reads ( Table 1 ). A total of 1,36,80,594 high-quality reads (average length 150 bp) were assembled into 14 contigs of the average length, 1,42,930 bp. Out of these, two contigs covered 99% of the genome, containing most of the genomic features of the analyzed strain. The genome of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 was computed to be about 2 Mb. The average genome GC content was about 37.27%. The genome size and GC% of the genome were in a similar range of previously reported genomes of Leuconostoc sp. strains [5] .
The complete genome of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 was comprised of 1.977 Mbp of a circular chromosome and 0.023 Mbp of the extra-chromosomal plasmid ( Fig. 1 a). RAST annotation revealed the presence of 1971 protein-coding genes, 3 rRNA, and 59 tRNA genes in the genome ( Table 1 ). The number of protein-coding genes identified in the present genome was in agreement with the findings reported in the previous studies on Leuconostoc sp. [38,39] .
Sequence similarity and phylogenetic analysis The 16S rRNA sequence of 1549 bp was mapped on the EzBioCloud server and NCBI nucleotide (nr) collection. On the basis of the 16S rRNA sequence, Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 showed a maximum identity of 99.93% with Leu. mesenteroides strains: LK-151, BD1710, and DRC0211 and, Leu. mesenteroides subsp. suionicum strains: LT-38 and DSM 20241 (Table S1). The results are in accordance with a previous report in which Leu. suionicum strains had been shown to share about 99% identity of 16S rRNA among themselves and also with strains of Leu. mesenteroides [5] .
A phylogenetic tree was constructed by taking into account the 16S rRNA and complete genome sequence of different subspecies and strains of Leu. mesenteroides , and Leu. suionicum available in the public domain. The phylogenetic analysis placed Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 close to Leu. suionicum ( Fig. 2 ).
ANI and dDDH analysis The average nucleotide index (ANI) values were computed among Leuconostoc species genomes. Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 shared a higher ANI value of 99.1–99.3% with Leu. suionicum genomes, whereas, the ANI value was 93.4–93.9% with Leu. mesenteroides genomes ( Fig. 3 ). In line with the ANI results, Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 genome shared a higher DNA-DNA hybridization (dDDH) value (97.73%) with the genomes belonging to Leu. suionicum , as compared to about 44% dDDH with Leu. mesenteroides genome (Table S2). Thus, when compared with Leu. mesenteroides genomes, the ANI, and dDDH values of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 strain was lower than the threshold values of 95% and 70 %, respectively, indicating delineation of the latter from Leu. mesenteroides species. Significantly higher ANI and dDDH values with the Leu. suionicum genomes infer that Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 strain should be reclassified as a strain of Leu. suionicum. Thus, the genome sequence similarity analysis in the present study corroborated this strain ( Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508) to be Leu. suionicum . Nevertheless, on the basis of similar properties and 16S rRNA identity, many Leu. suionicum strains were previously known to be a subspecies type of Leu. mesenteroides [3] .
Genomic features Genomic islands Genomic islands (GIs) are the segments of DNA that represent horizontal gene transfer in a bacterial genome [40] . The whole genomic analysis identified a total of six GIs in Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 ( Fig. 1 b). A list of genes associated with these GIs is presented in Table S3. Out of these, GI-1 and GI-6 are known to accommodate the operons for acetylases, which represent a group of the enzymes essential in the microbial metabolism. Acetylases are also involved in cell wall synthesis [41] . GI-2 contains integrases that are majorly involved in plasmid conjugation systems. GI-3 and GI-4 have been found to contain phage proteins, whereas GI-5 mostly represents hypothetical proteins [42] .
Insertion sequence elements Insertion sequence (IS) elements are the mobile DNA fragments that can move from one chromosomal position to the other and may alter gene expression [43] . In the complete genome of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508, a total of fifteen IS elements were identified. Out of these, the most abundant elements were ISL3 and IS30 (Table S4). The ISL3 and IS30 types have been well studied in Leuconostoc sp. and Lactobacillus sp. [44,45] . Furthermore, ISL3 element has been detected in many gram-positive, non-spore forming coccus bacterial species [43] . These elements are possibly associated with the genome elasticity functions, determinant in adapting diverse environmental conditions. The involvement of IS30 element has been reported in genetic determinants involved in sugar utilization. It assists the adaptation of bacteria for fermentation industries and natural habitats like gut [45] .
Phages The scanning with Islandviewer could not find any possible pathogenicity islands in the genome. The presence of virulence factors was also assessed in the genome, but no similarity was found. The identification of phages associated with LAB species has gained remarkable attention in the last few years. Most of these phages belonged to the family Siphoviridae, Podoviridae, and Myoviridae [46] . The Phaster software identified a prophage element incorporated in GI-3 region of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 genome ( Fig. 1 b). The prophage region of 43.4 kb was similar to PHAGE_Strept_P9 (NC_009819), a member of Siphoviridae family. A total of 49 protein-coding genes were predicted in this region, out of which 35 belonged to phage proteins and rest 14 to hypothetical proteins (Table S5). The phages reported in the association with Leuconostoc genus mostly belong to the Siphoviridae family [46] . Although the association between phage and dairy culture microbe is supposed to contribute a crucial role in natural fermentation, the detailed molecular mechanism is not clear [46] .
Extra-chromosomal region The extra-chromosomal region of 23 kb was mapped to the NCBI nucleotide collection (nr). The plasmid sequence showed about 99%, 94%, and 90% identity with Leu. citreum plasmid 1, Leu. mesenteroides strain DRC1506 plasmid pDRC3, and Weissella cibaria strain BM2 plasmid pBM2, respectively. The BLASTx analysis against NCBI-nr database revealed occupancy of ATP-binding cassette domain, site-specific integrases, plasmid mobilization protein, and helicases in the extra-chromosomal genomic sequence. Furthermore, the RAST annotation showed the existence of a few mobile element proteins, partial plasmid mobilization protein, and many hypothetical proteins in the extra-chromosome region. Interestingly, a homologous copper oxidase was detected in the plasmid of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508. This is the first report about the presence of copper oxidase in the plasmid of a Leu. suionicum type strain. Nevertheless, copper oxidase has been previously reported in many Leuconostoc species like Leu. mesenteroides , Leu. lactis , Leu. plantarum , Leu. citrenum , etc. All these copper oxidase sequences share 99–100% protein sequence identity and subject coverage among themselves. The copper oxidase from Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 was found more than 99% identical to that of Leu. messenteroides and Weissella cibaria , at the protein level.
Comparative genome analysis The complete genome of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 was aligned with Leu. suionicum strains ( Leu. suionicum DSM 20241 and Leu. suionicum LT-38) and the representative strain of Leu. mesenteroides ( Leu. mesenteroides subsp. mesenteroides ATCC 8293) to execute comparative analysis at the sequence as well as functional levels. The whole-genome sequence, KEGG, and RAST annotations were taken into account in the comparative genome analysis. The dot plot pattern of pairwise alignment depicted a higher similarity among Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508, Leu. suionicum LT-38, and Leu. suionicum DSM 20241 ( Fig. S2 ). However, a few genomic rearrangements were also seen, which could be the result of genome shuffling [47] .
Largely, the MAUVE alignment showed a synteny among the genomes of the aforementioned Leu. mesenteroides , and Leu. suionicum strains. However, in agreement with dot plot analysis, the genetic arrangement of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 was relatively more synchronous to Leu. suionicum DSM 20241 and Leu. suionicum LT-38, as compared to Leu. mesenteroides subsp. mesenteroides ATCC 8293. The MAUVE alignment analysis led to the identification of six Locally Collinear Blocks (LCBs) that are DNA blocks of specific lengths ( Fig. 4 ). The LCB 2 region contained the prophage region, as detected by the Phaster tool. LCB2 and LCB3 were possibly be rearranged in Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 with respect to their corresponding positions in the genomes of Leu. suionicum DSM 2024, Leu. suionicum LT-38, and Leu. mesenteroides ATCC 8293. Most of the coding part of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 genome was possessed by LCB1 region. LCB1 was found to be synchronous with the compared Leu. suionicum strains, except a few rearrangement incidences. The genome of a microbial strain is supposed to be the cluster of many unique lineage-specific segments, which could be shared with other related genomes [30] . Both Dot-plot and MAUVE alignments validated the close similarity of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 with Leu. suionicum . Nonetheless, the rearrangements and gaps in the genome underpinned reclassification of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 as a strain of Leu. suionicum [48] .
Functional profiling The functional profiling of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 genome was done by sequence annotation using the RAST server. A total of 1971 protein-encoding genes (PEGs) were identified in the genome. Further, the whole genome data was analyzed against the COG, KEGG, and CAZy databases. A total of 1206, and 1581 genes were mapped to COG, and KEGG databases, respectively. The 1206 genes were distributed into 20 COG functions (Table S6). The abundant COG functions were represented by amino acid transport and metabolism (12.3%), followed by translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis (11.2%), carbohydrate transport and metabolism (9.2%), and replication, recombination, and repair (6.3%). These functions, involved in their adaptation to the surrounding environmental conditions, are known to be present in LABs [49] . A total of 36 KEGG functions (level 2) were assigned to 1581 genes (Table S7). Carbohydrate metabolism (15%) was the most dominant, followed by amino acid metabolism (10%), and membrane transport (8%) ( Fig. S3 b). The genomic presence of copper oxidase precursor was classified under virulence, disease, and defense category (Table S10).
CAZy database includes the enzymes involved in degradation, modification, and creation of glycosidic bonds. LAB species are known for their carbohydrate metabolic activities, CAZy being a specific database, can help in identifying enzymes involved in processing carbohydrates. In the genome analysis, a total of 265 genes were mapped to CAZY families, out of which, GH70 (23.98%) was the most dominant, followed by GH13 (21.8%), GH68 (10%), GT51 (9.6%), and GH65 (7.7%) ( Fig. S3 a). Many carbohydrate-transforming enzymes of lignocellulose hydrolysis significance were identified ( Table 2 ). The genes were distributed among the 12 GH and 4 GT families. Glycoside hydrolases catalyze the cleavage of O-glycosidic bonds linking the carbohydrate moieties or carbohydrate and non-carbohydrate moieties [28] . GH70 family includes transglucosylases, generally secreted by LAB members, including Leuconostoc sp. transglucosylases catalyze the intra- or intermolecular replacement of glycoside molecule at the anomeric position, giving rise to new glycoside molecules, e.g., oligosaccharides [50] . Genome analysis depicted the presence of amylases, beta-glucosidases, beta-xylosidases, beta-galactosidase, representing the GH13 family, in Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508. The gene encoding levansucrase detected in the genome belongs to the GH68 family. Glycosyltransferases (GTs) are involved in the formation of glycosidic bonds by transfer of sugar moiety from the activated sugar donor to the acceptor molecule [28] . In Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 genome, GT51, was the dominant GT family, which constitutes murein polymerases. These are majorly involved in the synthesis of the peptidoglycan cell wall and play crucial roles in maintaining the integrity of the cell wall [51] .
Core and pan-genome analysis The 59 genomes of Leu. suionicum and Leu. mesenteroides strains were aligned to generate the core and pan-genome profiles ( Fig. 5 a). In the genomic comparison, the maximum of 715 and 3898 genes were identified in the core and pan genomes, respectively ( Fig. 5 b).
KEGG profiling classified the core genes into six categories. The most abundant category was metabolism (64%) followed by genetic information (20%), and environmental information processing (8%) ( Fig. S4 ). Similarly, in COG profiles of the core genome, metabolism (35.5%) was the dominant category, followed by an information storage and processing (34%), the cellular process, and signaling (10%) ( Fig. S5 ). The COG terms related to translation, ribosomal structure, and biogenesis [J] were represented by 15.9% of core genes. About 8% of core genes were mapped to amino acid transport and metabolism [E], 6.8% to transcription [K], 5.8% to replication, recombination, and repair [L]. Furthermore, 4% of core genes showed their involvement in carbohydrate transport and metabolism [G].
In the pan-genome of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508, the most abundant KEGG category was metabolism (73%), followed by environmental information processing (14%), and genetic information (6.6%). In the COG classification, the dominant category was metabolism (65.6%), followed by the information storage and processing (59.9%), and poorly characterized features (46.6%) ( Fig. S4 ). The mapping of pan genes on CAZy database resulted in five hits, but only one of them holds the promising domain for carbohydrate active enzymes (Table S8). This gene encodes for alpha-xylosidase, exhibiting 86% identity at the protein level with a known hit (accession no. AEJ31250.1). This is the first report detecting an alpha-xylosidase in the genome of a Leu. suionicum strain (i.e., Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508).
Genome analysis by the BPGA pipeline divulged 89 unique genes in the strain, Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 ( Fig. 5 a). Out of them, a total of 51 genes could be annotated by performing BLASTx against the NCBI-nr database on the criteria of a minimum 26% identity and 50% subject coverage (Table S9). About half of the annotated sequences were mapped on hypothetical proteins. Nevertheless, a few strain-specific genes could also be identified, e.g., alpha-xylosidase (86% identity at 99.8% subject coverage), acetyltransferase (57.64% identity at 97.5% subject coverage), major facilitator superfamily permease (79.4% identity at 99.5% subject coverage), and multi-transmembrane protein (30.72% identity at 96.7% subject coverage) ( Table 3 ). These strain-specific genes did not show alignment with the genomic information of Leu. suionicum strains available in NCBI database. The presence of strain-specific genes differentiated Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 from the available strains of Leu. suionicum .
The following strains of Leu. suionicum —DSM20241, LT-38, and MTCC 10508, shared carbohydrate transforming genes, and carbohydrate transporters, like permeases and phosphotransferases system (PTS). This coincides with similar fermentation capabilities in these three strains. The PTS executes the translocation of carbohydrate molecules via phosphorylation of sugars, whereas permeases facilitate diffusion of the specific molecules through cell wall depending on the concentration gradient [52] . RAST annotation of the genome depicted information about l -arabinose isomerase, fructokinase, sucrose phosphorylase, galactokinase, trehalose phosphorylase, levansucrase, dextransucrase, etc., which are the key enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism reported in most of the species of the genus Leuconostoc [49] . Further, RAST annotation revealed the co-existence of 38 functions belonging to the biosynthesis of histidine, methionine, biotin, and folate, in the Leu. suionicum strains, DSM 2024, LT-38, and MTCC 10508. However, surprisingly, these functions were found absent in Leu. mesenteroides ATCC 8293. These metabolic subsystems are involved in utilizing different amino acids and contribute to bacterial growth and development [53] . The presence of folate biosynthesis pathway in Leuconostoc sp. is in accordance with the enhancement of folate concentration in the dairy products fermented by LAB [54] .
Antibiotic resistance Genome mapping to PATRIC database revealed a total of eight antibiotic resistance (AR) genes, gdpD , mprF , gidB , rpoB , S12p , pgsA , rpoC , and S10p , which are known to be involved in acquiring tolerance to vancomycin ( mprF ), streptomycin ( gidB , and S12p ), tetracycline ( S10p ), daptomycin ( gdpD , pgsA , and rpoC ), and rifamycin ( rpoB ) (Table S11). Furthermore, engagement of these AR genes has been noted in other metabolic functions such as methylation of 16S rRNA [55] , encoding β-subunit of RNA polymerase [56] , the formation of ribosomal proteins [57] , and synthesis of phosphatidyl-glycerol [58] . In bacteria, the mutational acquisition is considered as a crucial route for the emergence of antibiotic resistance. In the case of gdpD gene, the deletion of ATT codon encoding isoleucine residue at 170 position in the protein provides daptomycin resistance [59] . The deletion of adenine at 488 position in gidB leads to the incapability of G527 methylation in 16S rRNA, resulting in resistance against streptomycin [55] . Three point mutations in rpoB , changing the amino acids at S522L, S531W, and H526Y, confers rifamycin resistance [56] . Point mutations in rpoC , causing F632S or Q961K modifications, makes the bacterium less susceptible to daptoycin [56,60] . A point mutation in pgsA gene, altering A64V, confers resistance against daptomycin [61] . In the case of small subunit ribosomal proteins, S12p and S10p, point mutation led modifications, K43R/T, K88R, and D60Y, make the bacterium resistant to streptomycin and tetracycline, respectively [57,62] . Multiple peptide resistance factor (MprF) is known to provide resistance against several cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs) like vancomycin [63] . In a study, distinct mutations in MprF have been observed to alter the daptomycin susceptibility in the bacterium [64] . In the present study, the genome sequence analysis bespoke vancomycin and streptomycin resistance in Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508, possibly conferred by mprF and the mutated gidB , respectively. This is in accordance with the previous reports demonstrating vancomycin and streptomycin resistance in Leuconostoc sp. [2,65] .
Antimicrobial activity BLASTx analysis against bacteriocins revealed the presence of a gene encoding copper oxidase in the extra-chromosomal genome of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508. Copper oxidase is capable of degrading the bioamines in fermented foods [66] . Biogenic amines are nitrogenous substances of low molecular weight that often gets accumulated at high concentrations in fermented foods, causing toxic effects to the consumers [67] . The consumption of these bioamines can cause headaches, fluctuation in blood pressure, nausea, and cardiac palpitation [68] . Therefore, the presence of microorganisms equipped with copper oxidase in the fermented food products would be beneficial.
Validation of genome assembly The DNA fragments encoding beta-galactosidase and alpha-xylosidase from the core and pan genomic regions, respectively, were PCR amplified, taking the genomic DNA of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 as a template ( Fig. S6 ). The amplicons were cloned in the pJET vector and sequenced. The pairwise sequence alignment of the assembled sequence data and the gene sequencing results displayed 100% identity, validating the in silico assembly.
Conclusion This study presents the analysis of the whole-genome sequence and functional attributes of Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508. Whole-genome sequence similarity analysis against the NCBI database and the phylogenetic investigation stipulated the closest resemblance of this strain with Leu. suionicum . ANI and dDDH analysis, Dot plot, and MAUVE alignment braced Leuconostoc sp. MTCC 10508 to be a strain of Leu. suionicum . Functional profiling of the whole genome sequence data divulged genes related to carbohydrate transformation, folate biosynthesis, antibiotic resistance, bacteriocins, alpha-xylosidase, copper oxidase, etc. Together, the results revealed the reclassification of Leu. mesenteroides MTCC 10508 as a strain of Leu. suionicum , and divulged the genetic resource of enzymes of industrial significance .
Data accessibility The genome sequence data is available in the NCBI bioproject ID PRJNA595651.