https://doi.org/10.4014/jmb.2009.09034
Identification and Monitoring of Lactobacillus delbrueckii Subspecies Using Pangenomic-Based Novel Genetic Markers
Abstract Genetic markers currently used for the discrimination of Lactobacillus delbrueckii subspecies have low efficiency for identification at subspecies level. Therefore, our objective in this study was to select novel genetic markers for accurate identification and discrimination of six L. delbrueckii subspecies based on pangenome analysis. We evaluated L. delbrueckii genomes to avoid making incorrect conclusions in the process of selecting genetic markers due to mislabeled genomes. Genome analysis showed that two genomes of L. delbrueckii subspecies deposited at NCBI were misidentified. Based on these results, subspecies-specific genetic markers were selected by comparing the core and pangenomes. Genetic markers were confirmed to be specific for 59,196,562 genome sequences via in silico analysis. They were found in all strains of the same subspecies, but not in other subspecies or bacterial strains. These genetic markers also could be used to accurately identify genomes at the subspecies level for genomes known at the species level. A real-time PCR method for detecting three main subspecies (L. delbrueckii subsp. delbrueckii, lactis, and bulgaricus) was developed to cost-effectively identify them using genetic markers. Results showed 100% specificity for each subspecies. These genetic markers could differentiate each subspecies from 44 other lactic acid bacteria. This real-time PCR method was then applied to monitor 26 probiotics and dairy products. It was also used to identify 64 unknown strains isolated from raw milk samples and dairy products. Results confirmed that unknown isolates and subspecies contained in the product could be accurately identified using this real-time PCR method.
Keywords Lactobacillus delbrueckii subspecies, pangenome, genetic marker, identification, real-time PCR, probiotic product
Introduction Lactobacillus delbrueckii comprises six subspecies, namely delbrueckii, lactis, bulgaricus, indicus, jakobsenii, and sunkii, all of which have historically been differentiated based on their ability to metabolize different carbohydrates [1]. Among these subspecies, L. delbrueckii subsp. lactis and bulgaricus are usually associated with the manufacture of dairy products such as cheeses and yogurt [2]. L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus is one of the starter culture components for the production of yogurt [1, 3]. This subspecies displays probiotic properties [4]. On the other hand, L. delbrueckii subsp. lactis is traditionally used in cheese production and can be distinguished from L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus by its extensive carbohydrate metabolizing capabilities [1, 5]. L. delbrueckii subsp. delbrueckii cannot ferment lactose. It is typically associated with fermented vegetables [2]. L. delbrueckii subsp. indicus, jakobsenii, and sunkii are relatively minor subspecies isolated from Indian dairy products, fermented alcoholic beverages, and non-salted pickle as a traditional Japanese food, respectively [6-9].
Accurate identification of L. delbrueckii subspecies in food samples is an important issue to confirm probiotic properties and perform product quality assessment [4]. Genetic markers and molecular-based methods have been used to efficiently identify and detect lactic acid bacteria commonly used in commercial probiotic and dairy products. Molecular-based methods for the identification and typing of lactic acid bacteria have been reported, including amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP), DNA–DNA hybridization (DDH), multi-locus sequence analysis (MLST), and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) [6,10-12]. However, these techniques are labor-intensive, expensive, and time-consuming with low reproducibility whereas PCR-based methods are rapid, sensitive, and reliable for identifying lactic acid bacteria [4]. Of these methods, genetic markers such as the 16S rRNA gene and 16S–23S rRNA intergenic spacer region have been used to distinguish L. delbrueckii used in PCR-based methods [13]. Although genetic markers described above are useful for identifying L. delbrueckii at the species level, they cannot be applied to distinguish L. delbrueckii at the subspecies level [4].
Recently, the development of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and the increase in genome sequences have made it possible to rapidly and freely process large-scale sequence data on microorganisms in public repositories [14]. Pangenome analysis based on WGS has a wide range of applications, including prediction of lifestyles of microorganisms, pathogenicities, resistome, and taxonomy [15]. Pangenome analysis also allows reclassification of bacterial species and/or subspecies, improving and clarifying criteria previously presented [16]. In the present study, we selected six L. delbrueckii subspecies-specific genetic markers by pangenome analysis to develop a real-time PCR method for rapid identification of bacterial strains. The real-time PCR method we developed was then applied to bacterial strains isolated from raw milk, probiotic products, and dairy products to identify and differentiate three L. delbrueckii subspecies.
Materials and Methods Pangenome Analysis and Selection of Genetic Markers The in silico scheme for selecting the genetic markers of six L. delbrueckii subspecies is illustrated in Fig. 1. A total of 41 genomes belonging to the subspecies L. delbrueckii subsp. delbrueckii, lactis, bulgaricus, indicus, jakobsenii, and sunkii were obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (Table 1). Phylogenetic analysis based on the pangenome was performed using microbial pangenomics in Anvi’o v6 software [17]. According to the developer’s recommendation, a genome database for pangenome analysis was constructed using Anvi’o genome storage. The pangenome was then analyzed using the NCBI BLASTp and MCL algorithm. Subsequently, a phylogenetic tree was constructed based on pangenome cluster frequencies.
The pangenome of L. delbrueckii subspecies was calculated using Bacterial Pan Genome Analysis (BPGA) pipeline ver. 1.3 (identity cut off = 50%) [18]. The pangenome was formatted into two local databases: a pangenome database and a core-genome database for each subspecies. Candidate genetic markers were selected by comparing the pangenome database composed of protein-coding genes, present in all genomes except for the target subspecies, and the core-genome database composed of protein-coding genes present in all genomes of target subspecies. Candidate genetic markers were then aligned with 59,196,562 sequences using BLASTN. Genetic markers only present in target subspecies but not present in other bacterial genomes were selected.
In Silico Specificity Confirmation and Development of Subspecies-Specific Primer A total of four genome sequences registered at the species level were obtained from the NCBI. Genetic marker specificity was aligned with 45 genome sequences, including genomes known to the species level using USEARCH ver. 9.0 [19]. Alignment results are presented as a heatmap using Seaborn python library in Matplotlib. Subspecies-specific primer pairs for L. delbrueckii subsp. lactis, bulgaricus, and delbrueckii were designed from their genetic markers using Primer Designer (Scientific and Education Software, USA).
DNA Extractions from L. delbrueckii Subspecies and Lactic Acid Bacteria For specificity testing of primer pairs developed in this study, the reference strains of lactic acid bacteria mainly isolated from probiotic and dairy products were used. A total of 54 strains of lactic acid bacteria including L. delbrueckii subspecies were obtained from the Korean Agricultural Culture Collection (KACC, Korea), the Korean Collection for Type Cultures (KCTC, Korea), the Korean Culture Center of Microorganisms (KCCM, Korea), the NITE Biological Resource Center (NBRC, Japan), and the Laboratory Isolates (LI, Korea) (Table 2). All reference strains were grown in MRS broth (Difco, Becton & Dickinson, USA) for extraction of genomic DNA. L. delbrueckii and other bacterial strains were cultured for 48 h at 42°C and 37°C under anaerobic condition, respectively. Bacterial cells were centrifuged at 13,600 ×g for 5 min and the supernatant was removed. Genomic DNA of reference strains was extracted using a DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Germany) following the protocol described previously [13, 20]. DNA concentration and purity were confirmed using a MaestroNano spectrophotometer (Maestrogen, USA).
Specificity and Accuracy of Specific Primer Pairs Real-time PCR assay was conducted to determine the specificity and accuracy of primer pairs using a 7500 Real-time PCR system. Each reaction contained 20 ng of genomic DNA, 10 μl of 2X Thunderbird SYBR qPCR Mix (Toyobo, Japan), 500 nM of primer pairs, and distilled water up to 20 μl total volume. Real-time PCR conditions consisted of initiation at 95°C for 2 min followed by 30 amplification cycles of 95°C for 5 s and 60°C for 30 s. Melting curves were obtained at 95°C for 15 s, 60°C for 1 min, 95°C for 30 s, and 60°C for 15 s. Specificity of primer pairs was tested against a total of 10 strains of L. delbrueckii subspecies and 44 other lactic acid bacteria. For the accuracy test, genomic DNA from each reference strain was serially diluted and used for real-time PCR.
Application of Real-Time PCR Method To test the developed real-time PCR method, 64 isolates, 15 probiotic products, and 11 dairy products were used. L. delbrueckii subspecies were isolated from three raw milk samples and three dairy products. Serially diluted samples were spread onto MRS agar plates (Difco, Becton & Dickinson, USA) and incubated at 42°C for 48 h under anaerobic conditions. Probiotic and dairy products were obtained from markets around the world. Genomic DNAs were extracted from isolates and products under the same conditions as described in section 2.3. DNA Extraction of L. delbrueckii Subspecies and Lactic Acid Bacteria. For the application test, genomic DNAs of isolates or products were added to wells of 96-well plates containing 2X qPCR mix (Toyobo) and subspecies-specific primer pairs. The real-time PCR condition was the same as that described in section 2.4. Specificity and Accuracy for Specific Primer Pairs.
Results and Discussion Pangenome Analysis Many studies have previously reported a mislabeling issue regarding subspecies or closely related species in the NCBI genome database [20, 21]. In these studies, the majority of the mislabeled genomes were closely related species [20, 22, 23]. Such genomes should therefore be evaluated to avoid reaching incorrect conclusions in a comparative genomic analysis. In the present study, for the first time, we evaluated the genomes of L. delbrueckii subspecies by phylogenetic analysis based on the pangenome before specific genetic markers were selected. Phylogenetic analysis results based on pangenome frequencies were displayed along with the distribution of subspecies’ specific regions. Each bar represents L. delbrueckii subspecies genomes and each layer presents pangenome distribution (Fig. 2). Most genomes clustered according to the subspecies. However, some genomes of L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus and delbrueckii clustered with different subspecies. Genomes of L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus FAM 21277 and delbrueckii TUA4408L clustered with L. delbrueckii subsp. lactis and sunkii, respectively. Based on these results, L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus FAM 21277 and delbrueckii TUA4408L were determined as L. delbrueckii subsp. lactis and sunkii, respectively. These genomes should be indicated correctly in the genome database to avoid further misidentification. We also suggest implementing measures to prevent and correct taxonomic errors in the NCBI database to avoid confusion in future research.
Closely related strains in phylogenetic analysis can be distinguished using efficient and customized mining methods for genome sequences [20, 24, 25]. Conventional methods can be used to successfully distinguish pathogenic bacteria that are difficult to differentiate, although these methods only focus on pathogenic bacteria. Studies on lactic acid bacteria are still lacking. Here, we employed a pangenome approach to identify novel genetic markers for specific identification and detection of L. delbrueckii subspecies.
As a result of pangenome analysis, a total of 67,178 genes from 41 L. delbrueckii subspecies yielded a pangenome size of 3,456 genes. The core-genome, accessory-genome, and unique-genome had 749, 2,071, and 636 genes, respectively. Six subspecies-specific genetic markers were then obtained by pangenome analysis. Genetic markers were found to be protein-coding genes present in the same subspecies but absent in other subspecies or bacterial strains. By comparing genomes of the same subspecies, 995 to 1,628 protein-coding genes were found in common in the genomes of each subspecies and considered as the core-genome for each subspecies. After comparing each core-genome with pangenome for protein-coding genes present in all genomes except for target genomes, 5 to 50 protein-coding genes were selected as candidate genetic markers for each subspecies. These candidate genetic markers were aligned with 59,196,562 genome sequences. Genes not present in other bacterial strains except target subspecies were finally selected as genetic markers. Selected genetic markers of L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus, lactis, delbrueckii, indicus, jakobsenii, and sunkii were identified as YcaO-like family protein (Accession No. ABJ57813.1), Ser/Thr protein kinase (Accession No. EGD27260.1), choline kinase (Accession No. KNZ37552.1), DNA methyltransferase (Accession No. KNE31255.1), RpoD family RNA polymerase sigma factor (Accession No. EOD03403.1), and hypothetical protein (Accession No. APG74821.1), respectively.
Genetic Marker Specificity Test The specificity of genetic markers was tested using 45 genomes including genomes registered at species level by in silico analysis. The heatmap for identities of genetic markers in genomes is shown with color codes, ranging from blue (region with high identity) to sky blue (region with low identity) (Fig. 3). Each genetic marker shared more than 95% sequence identity with genomes of most corresponding subspecies. In contrast, a genetic marker for L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus was present in 19 bulgaricus genomes (95–100% identity), but one genome had the genetic marker for L. delbrueckii subsp. lactis instead of bulgaricus (99% identity). A genetic marker for L. delbrueckii subsp. delbrueckii was present in six delbrueckii genomes (99–100% identity), but one genome had the genetic marker for L. delbrueckii subsp. sunkii instead of delbrueckii (100% identity). These results were the same as those of pangenome analysis. Genetic markers were aligned with their genomes to determine the subspecies of genomes registered at the species level. L. delbrueckii AVK, TJA31, and 328M contained the genetic marker for L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus (96–97% sequence identity). L. delbrueckii LDELB18P1 contained the genetic marker for L. delbrueckii subsp. lactis (100% sequence identity).
In previous studies, genes such as 16S rRNA, 16S–23S rRNA intergenic spacer region, and the elongation factor Tu (tuf) gene have been used to distinguish microorganisms at the species or subspecies level [4,9,26-29]. However, some studies have reported that these genes share high sequence similarities without showing sufficient variabilities to allow for the differentiation between L. delbrueckii subspecies [4, 13]. In contrast, we selected genetic markers specific to the genomes of each subspecies using pangenome analysis. The markers selected in this study were specific to L. delbrueckii subspecies and other bacterial strains. They were able to accurately identify subspecies level for unknown genomes.
Specificity and Accuracy for Specific Primer Pairs The method to identify L. delbrueckii subspecies with genetic markers selected in this study requires WGS and bioinformatics analysis to confirm the presence of their markers. This method can accurately identify L. delbrueckii subspecies. However, the cost associated with WGS and its informational capacities must be considered. In addition, specialized researchers are needed to handle bioinformatics analysis [14, 30]. Therefore, we developed a real-time PCR method to cost-effectively identify many L. delbrueckii isolates using relatively simple procedures. This real-time PCR method is designed to identify three main subspecies, L. delbrueckii subsp. delbrueckii, lactis, and bulgaricus [2] that are mainly isolated from food or used for fermenting dairy products.
Subspecies-specific primer pairs were designed from selected genetic markers. Information for primer pairs is shown in Table 3. The specificity test for these designed subspecies-specific primer pairs was performed using 54 reference strains of lactic acid bacteria. The genomic DNA of each subspecies generated a positive signal for corresponding primer pairs, whereas genomic DNAs from other L. delbrueckii subspecies and lactic acid bacteria did not generate any signal (Fig. 4). The Ct value ranged from 12.72 to 16.94 for each subspecies-specific primer pair. Genomic DNAs of three subspecies were used to confirm the accuracy of primer pairs. Standard curves were generated using serial diluted genomic DNA at an amount ranging from 0.002 ng to 20 ng. Slopes for standard curves of L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus, lactis, and delbrueckii were −3.44, −3.46, and −3.34, respectively. All correlation coefficient values (R2) were greater than 0.998 and all amplification efficiencies were more than 94%(Fig. 5). All of these values met real-time PCR conditions indicating a high efficiency [31]. Thus, the method we developed in the present study shows high accuracies. Our real-time PCR method targeting specific genetic markers enables rapid and accurate identification of three L. delbrueckii subspecies.
Application of Real-Time PCR Method Fifty-one isolates, 15 probiotic products, and 11 dairy products were used to perform the application test of the developed real-time PCR method. Results of its application to probiotic and dairy products were compared with their label claims. A total of 26 products were detected with the same subspecies as their label claims (Table 4). However, for 16 products, subspecies was incorrectly claimed on the label. According to the nomenclature of subspecies, these should be labeled as “L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus,” not “L. bulgaricus” [12]. Dairy products labeled only with lactic acid bacteria were confirmed to contain L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus by real-time PCR. As a result of the application of our method to different isolates, a total of 64 strains isolated from raw milk and dairy products were identified as L. delbrueckii subsp. lactis (n = 17) and bulgaricus (n = 47) (Table 4). These results confirmed that the real-time PCR developed in this study could accurately identify strains present in probiotic and dairy products and bacterial isolates to the subspecies level.
Conclusion In conclusion, pangenome analysis was performed to select genetic markers for six L. delbrueckii subspecies. These genetic markers were present in all genomes of the same subspecies but absent in genomes of other subspecies and bacterial strains. To rapidly and cost-effectively identify L. delbrueckii subspecies, subspecies-specific primer pairs for three subspecies mainly isolated from food samples were designed. The real-time PCR method using these genes could accurately identify L. delbrueckii subspecies and other lactic acid bacteria with high specificity. The developed real-time PCR method was able to successfully monitor probiotic and dairy products and identify various isolates. Thus, our method can be used to accurately identify L. delbrueckii subspecies and determine the nomenclature of these subspecies. Furthermore, it can contribute to safety in the food industry by ensuring products are labeled to show the correct strain.