https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2020.12.015
Title: Pan-genomics, drug candidate mining and ADMET profiling of natural product inhibitors screened against Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Abstract: Yersinia pseudotuberculosis belongs to the family Enterobacteriaceae and is responsible for scarlatinoid fever, food poisoning, post-infectious complications like erythema nodosum/reactive arthritis as well as pseudoappendicitis in children. Genome sequences of the 23 whole genomes from NCBI were utilized for conducting the pan-genomic analysis. Essential proteins from the core region were obtained and drug targets were identified using a hierarchal in silico approach. Among these, multidrug resistance protein sub-unit mdtC was chosen for further analysis. This protein unit confers resistance to antibiotics upon forming a tripartite complex with units A and B in
Escherichia coli. Details of the function have not yet been elucidated experimentally in Yersinia spp. Computational structure modeling and validation were followed by screening against phytochemical libraries of traditional Indian (Ayurveda), North African, and traditional Chinese flora using Molecular Operating Environment software version 2019.0102. ADMET profiling and descriptor study of best docked compounds was studied. Since phytotherapy is the best resort to antibiotic resistance so these compounds should be tested experimentally to further validate the results. The obtained information could aid wet-lab scientists to work on the scaffold of screened drug-like compounds from natural resources. This could be useful in our quest for antibiotic-resistant therapy against
Y. pseudotuberculosis . Introduction Yersinia (referred hereafter as Y .) comprises of 18 different species, among which three are known human pathogens. Y. pestis is responsible for the bubonic plague while the enteropathogenic ones include Y. pseudotuberculosis and Y. enterocolitica [ 1 ]. It was listed as the third most prevalent cause of bacterial diarrhea [ 2 ] across Europe. The pathogen Y. pseudotuberculosis can cause both sporadic and epidemic infections across the globe especially in countries with colder environments [ 3 ]. It consists of a single circular chromosome along with a virulence plasmid labeled as pIB [ 4 ]. Heterogeneity between Yersinia species is based on both gene gain and loss. Y. pseudotuberculosis is considered to be the parent microbe, through which the deadly Y. pestis has evolved. The genetic sequence and other related cluster analysis showed that the evolution is a few thousand years old [ 5–8 ]. The dissimilarity between European and Far Eastern Y. pseudotuberculosis strains is based on virulence or toxin elements such as Y. pseudotuberculosis -derived mitogen A, a super-antigenic toxin characteristic of Far Eastern Y. pseudotuberculosis strains and responsible for Far Eastern Scarlet-like Fever [ 9 , 10 ].
The chief source of the transmission is infected animals which harbor them to human beings [ 11 ]. Pigs, goat, cattle, mice, sheep, chicken, rodents, dog, cat, and foxes are natural carriers of the pathogen, and contact of these animals with humans and their environment enables them to cause infection [ 12 , 13 ]. Infection usually occurs via contamination of food and water through animal droppings, especially food that is not properly cooked [ 14 , 15 ]. The pathogen is supported by cold temperature, so most of the cases occur in winter due to enhanced growth characteristics in lower temperatures [ 10 , 16 ]. Children in-between the age of 5–15 are more prone to this infection [ 17 ]. Compared to women, men are more prone to the infection of Y. pseudotuberculosis , but women are more common to have symptoms of arthritis, erythema, and nodosum as post-infection complications [ 18 ].
After entering the host system, the organism starts multiplying in the tissues and bypasses the phagocytic activity of the immune system via a 70-kb plasmid encoding the Yersinia outer protein (Yop) which protects the bacterium from being eliminated by the immune system [ 19 , 20 ]. Post-infection symptoms include pain in the abdomen along with fever. Diarrhea is rare, while reactive arthritis and rheumatologic manifestation is also indicated in late stages of complication. Besides this, children may develop terminal ileitis and intussusception [ 21 ]. The symptom of enterocolitis may prevail for 1–3 weeks. Other complications could occur as well, including erythema nodosum, arthralgias, reactive arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and lumbar facet joint disease [ 17 , 22 ]. Fever with a rash on the body involving the head, neck, lower extremity erythema, enanthem/rash that involves the mucosal membrane and may also help in developing the strawberry tongue appearance [ 18 , 23 ]. The infection could be treated with antibiotics used for gram-negative microbes like tetracycline, chloramphenicol, cefotaxime, and streptomycin [ 24–28 ].
The democratization of sequencing has made it easier to generate genomic sequence data so instead of relying on a single genome as a reference, multiple or pan-genome analysis is being conducted nowadays to find out core therapeutic proteins in the bacterial species, making the therapeutic candidates universal. Therefore, a pan-genomics mediated approach was undertaken for this study, to get reliable gene information and account for genetic discrepancy within species. It is also pertinent to mention that antimicrobials against bacterial infections pose the problem of antibiotic resistance development and nowadays natural products from several species of organisms are now used to discover the next generation of active agents against pathogens. More than half of the marketed pharmaceutical drugs are either inspired by or directly derived from natural products [ 29 , 30 ]. With the drying up of the antibiotic discovery pipeline, advancement in genome mining techniques is a boon that has led to better bioprospecting and discovery of antimicrobial compounds. Recently, Shi et al. [ 31 ] virtually screened a library of more than 2000 natural compounds against New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase 1 protein of Klebsiella pneumoniae and validated hesperidin as the best inhibitor using wet-lab assay. Similarly, natural compounds have been reported to suppress biofilm formation in bacteria [ 32 ]. Virtual screening is a rapid approach for screening inhibitors against pathogens and has previously proved useful in sifting useful compounds from the large libraries of antimicrobial compounds in a plethora of pathogens [ 33 , 34 ]. In this study, we employed a virtual screening approach with a focus on phytochemical inhibitor screening against Y. pseudotuberculosis, instead of repurposing FDA approved antibiotics or other approved drugs. ADMET profiling of top mined compounds was done to identify any toxicity parameters. To the best of authors knowledge, no such study on Y. pseudotuberculosis has been performed previously, thus making this study novel.
Material and methods Pan-genomics and core genome for essentiality analysis Whole genome sequences of Y. pseudotuberculosis ( n = 26) were retrieved from the NCBI database on 2nd June 2020 (shown in Table 1 ). Duplicate sequences of three strains i.e. IP 32953, PB1/+, and YP III were removed. Only one genome for each strain ( n = 23) was retained for analysis.
Pan and core genome statistics were calculated according to Basharat et al. [ 35 ] with slight modifications in parameters. BPGA software [ 36 ] was used for the purpose. USEARCH clustering algorithm with a 70% cut-off was utilized for clustering genes instead of 50, making our analysis more stringent. Pan and core genome plot was generated with 23 combinations i.e. equal to the number of genomes while MUSCLE was used for aligning genes and phylogeny was analyzed with the Neighbor-Joining method. Functional analysis based pan-genomics was done with COG, to assign functional categories to homologous gene sets. The obtained core genome consisted of 3009 protein-coding genes, which were used to predict their essentiality along the bacterial life cycle. Genes crucially required for the survival and functionality for the bacterium were analyzed using the Database of Essential Genes (DEG) and Cluster of Essential Genes (CEG). DEG is an online tool freely accessible on ( http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg/ ) searcher for genes in the identified organisms listed in Table1. CEG [ 37 ] was also used to predict essential genes as it differs from DEG in some attributes, it not only matches genes based on alignment but also on the bases of function eluting false positive matches. Genes that were specified as essential based on the union of these two tools were further processed.
Non-homology to host proteins and gut flora Keeping in mind the end goal to locate the bacterial genes which don't have similarity with the human host, the arrangement of essential protein groupings of Y. pseudotuberculosis was subjected to BLAST against the human genome. BLAST utilized for this purpose was used as a standalone program. To distinguish non-homologous genes, the parameters were set to a desired ( E -value) cut-off of 10 −2 , having the gap penalty = 11 and a gap extension penalty = 1 was set as the standard. The E-value consideration was based upon in-depth research protocol [ 38 ]. Similarly using the BLAST function, 83 different microbial flora of human host (Supplementary Table 1) were searched for homology against the strain. The gene pool was further narrowed by excluding homologous sequences to that of human and gut microbiota. Translated gene products were then taken for further analysis.
Structure prediction of drug target In order to predict a protein to be a suitable druggable target, several predefined parameters were used in the identification of pathogenic markers essential for the microbe. The proteins were studied for subcellular localization, molecular weight, and drug dependence analysis. Those fulfilling the required criteria were considered as drug targets. The localization of the proteins across the cell was predicted using the vector-machine based method and suffix tree algorithm feature of PSORTb. Transmembrane helices were predicted using TMHMM server v. 2.0. ( http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/ ). Among screened proteins, efflux protein resistant unit mdtC was selected for analysis. The 3D structures of the selected protein target was generated using the Swiss Model [ 39 ]. Swiss Model uses the query sequence and searches the SWISS-MODEL template library using BLAST and HHBlits. Template, in this case, was a protein with PDB ID: 3W9I . Using the coordinates of the template structure, the protein model was built while missing regions or insertions were inferred using the fragment-based library. Ultimately, their stability was analyzed and appropriate energy and force field was applied to the overall structure for the best fit of units [ 40 ]. Validation of structure was done using the Ramachandran plot at the RAMPAGE server ( http://mordred.bioc.cam.ac.uk/~rapper/rampage.php ) .
Screening of compounds against targets and ADMET analysis Several thousand compounds were screened against mdtC, with compounds retrieved from the Ayurvedic medicine database ( n = 2103) (available at http://ayurveda.pharmaexpert.ru/in ), North African flora compound database ( n = 6842) (available at http://bioinform.info/ ) and traditional Chinese medicine database ( n = 36,043) compounds from ZINC database ( https://zinc.docking.org/ ). Due to the ability of Molecular Operating Environment (MOE) to perform accurate prediction of binding affinities using a predefined algorithm and scoring for best docking between the receptor and ligand, it was used to screen several ligand-receptor interactions. Structure based docking and visualization were carried out according to Basharat et al. [ 40 ] in MOE (version 2019.0102), using the parameters: placement = triangle matcher, rescoring 1 = London dG, refinement = forcefield, rescoring 2 = affinity dG. Docked compounds were arranged in ascending order according to their binding energies. Compound with least energy was taken as top conformation. Compounds that were able to pass Lipinski's drug-like test and had minimum energy were selected as suitable inhibitors. Poisson–Boltzmann surface area continuum solvation (PBSA) energy was analyzed using SVL script, with the parameters SALT = NaCl, Concentration = 0.1 M, Interior Dielectic = 1, Exterior Dielectic = 80, Temperature = 300 K. ADME/Tox analysis was performed on top-scored compounds using an ADMET prediction server ( http://lmmd.ecust.edu.cn/admetsar2 ) for validation of their parameters as suitable binding/drug candidates. Skin permeation values were calculated from SwissADME ( http://www.swissadme.ch/ ).
Results and discussion Pan and core genome statistics Pan-genome consisted of 93,026 coding DNA sequences ( Table 2 ). Core CDSs made up of only 3.2% of total CDSs from the 23 studied Y. pseudotuberculosis genomes. Plotting of the gene families vs genomes using power-fit curve equation: f(x) = 3943.57·x 0.15 and exponential curve equation: f1(x) = 3619.93·e -0.01.x showed that the pan-genome is plateauing but the addition of more genomes might add to the number of accessory and unique genes (Supplementary Fig. 1). This is in alliance with the hypothesis previously reported by Basharat et al. [ 35 ]. The strain FDAARGOS_665 had least number of genes ( n = 4017), CDSs ( n = 3687) and number of accessory genes ( n = 584) with highest number of missing genes ( n = 161). The strain FDAARGOS_581 had highest number of genes (n = 4017), CDSs (n = 3687) and accessory genes ( n = 1236). Most number of unique genes ( n = 239) were present in the strain IP 31758 while the strain YP III lacked any unique gene. None of the genes were exclusively missing in five strains (FDAARGOS_579, FDAARGOS_584, IP2666pIB1, NCTC10275, and YP III). The highest number of genes were observed for the strain YP III followed by strain 1. COG analysis of the pan-genome showed that the core genome had the highest number of genes belonging to metabolism pathways and cellular signaling and processing genes were the least of the fraction (Supplementary Fig. 2). Information processing and storage genes were most abundant in the accessory and unique genome. Nucleotide and lipid transport genes were the lowest in the accessory genome of Y. pseudotuberculosis .
Core genome and essential genes prediction By using a hierarchical in silico approach, genes necessary for the bacterial metabolic pathway and the overall survival of the pathogen were determined out of 3009 core protein-coding sequences. These genes are always a subject of interest for researchers as they are thought to be evolutionarily more conserved than other non-essential genes, making them a good target for therapy [ 41 ]. It is interesting to mention that the advent of transposon-mediated mutagenesis in 1999 was a milestone in the discovery of essential genes. It was supported by the development of single-gene knockout and antisense RNA inhibition of RNA transcripts. All these techniques provide basic infrastructure for upcoming powerful tools of bioinformatics which make the work faster, reliable, and reproducible [ 42 ]. Two tools i.e. DEG and CEG were used in this study for the essentiality determination of genes. DEG is a homology-based search database of essential genes (having data for 31 different bacterial species with ~12,000 essential bacterial genes [ 43–45 ]. CEG, on the other hand, predicts essential genes not only on sequence homology but also function. Genes in CEG are arranged in 932 gene clusters and 1929 pseudo clusters. The number of essential CDSs for Y. pseudotuberculosis predicted by DEG was 1566, while CEG stringent function predicted 1406 proteins to be essential, so combined essential proteins predicted upon the union of both the databases was found to be 1382. These were then used for further downstream analysis.
Drug target identification Selective toxicity for Yersinia is a key factor for the drug to be fully effective, so in order to screen the drug that could be precisely selectively toxic for the bacteria but safe for the host and the microbes residing the gut was our key aim. We identified 698 genes lacking in human host but present in the pathogenic bacteria. This enables the drug to selectively target the microbial metabolism and prevention of harmful effects to the host metabolic activates. About 354 different genes had no homology with host or gut bacteria, which were considered for drug target study. Compelling drug targets were determined from the selected essential proteins using BLAST and out of the total core genome, 85 CDSs were demarcated as druggable (Supplementary Table 2). Their translated protein products were obtained and the final candidate (mdtC) for further analysis was chosen by a combination of molecular weight and drugability parameters during screening. In the modern antibiotic era, 60% of the antibiotics target membrane proteins [ 46 ]. Proteins with sub-cellular localization are vital to cellular activities as they are involved in transport, metabolism, and cellular signaling, so ultimately making them more vulnerable target of antibiotics. Based on previous studies, proteins having low molecular weight are readily soluble and can be purified easily, this is why mdtC was chosen among druggable targets, due to low molecular weight and being a part of the membrane.
Protein structure prediction After the prediction of structures with SWISS Model, the structure of mdtC showed a modeling score of 0.6 and a Z -score < 1, residues having score greater than 0.6 and a Z-score < 1 is indicative of a good quality structure in co-relation with previously published data of x-ray predicted protein structures. The Ramachandran plot demonstrated showed 93.1% in favored, 5.0% in allowed while 1.9% residues in the outlier region. 3D/1D profile was ≥ 0.2%, while ERRAT score for mdtC was 93.92 respectively. mdtC was predicted to be localized in the cytoplasmic membrane and structure consisted of helices that penetrate the membrane and periplasmic space ( Fig. 1 ). These transmembrane helices along with other domains form a portal for substances to pass through and ultimately their high expression helps in increased antibiotic resistance. Its conformation traps the molecules into its hydrophobic passages generated by the transmembrane helices forming a cone shape pore. It is also reported that it has two different channels supporting the movement of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic molecules as a result of different arrangements of protein moieties.
Virtual screening for inhibitor discovery Using receptor centric approach, three natural product libraries were screened for inhibition of mdtC. The entire surface of the protein was analyzed for the best docking posture using MOE. Chemicals were ranked based on scoring energy values. Interactions were then studied ( Fig. 2 ) along with various parameters of interactions from each library (are shown in Table 3 ).
Compounds were studied for their in silico pharmacokinetics and pharmacology properties via absorption distribution metabolism and excretion (ADME) technique, to sift out the best possible drug candidate, having higher penetration and least side effects to the human host ( Table 4 ; Supplementary Table 3). None of these compounds showed any blood-brain barrier permeability or mutagenicity while all of them were substrates for P-glycoprotein. They also did not show inhibition of cytochromes CYP1A2, CYP2C19, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4 enzyme. Non-binding with the CYP enzymes means that site of metabolism is not cytochrome but through some other protein. None of the compounds predicted positive for mutagenicity in the predicted AMES toxicity test, which suggests they do not cause mutations in the host DNA replication or translation processes.
5′-hydroxy Mongolicain A, Mongolicain A, and Psidinin C exhibited the least acute toxicity for rat while ZINC85594929 and ZINC08214655 indicated the least acute toxicity for fish (Supplementary Table 1). Psidinin C displayed the least toxicity against Tetrahymena pyriformis while Punicalaginin, 5′-hydroxy Mongolicain A, Mongolicain A, and Psidinin C showed the least acute oral toxicity for humans. Compounds mined in this study as potential drug candidates were found to be active and safe have not previously been addressed as anti- Yersinia to date. The novel candidates would be interesting to explore as anti- Yersinia compounds, further in the laboratory conditions.
Conclusion Since ancient times, humans have been highly dependent on traditional medicines acquired from natural sources. In the modern era, the trend continues and with increased drug resistance emerging as a consequence of failed antibiotic treatment, phytochemicals are good to explore for the treatment of bacterial infections. Virtual screening helps reduce the number of potential candidates and computational software allow us to study their ADMET and carcinogenicity potential, thus making the study green as well as quick. Intervening the drug efflux component of Y. pseudotuberculosis could compromise the integrity and the pathogenic function of the bacterium, and possibly other related bacteria—making the efflux pump components a potential therapeutic target for the selective control of pathogenic microorganisms of this class. Gene virulence was also established for mdtC and having no relationship with the human host, nor their gut microbiota and fulfilling druggable target parameter, it was used for inhibition screening. The current study sheds light on the binding of phytochemicals to the efflux pump component of Y. pseudotuberculosis. Top scored compounds were Nilotinin D3 and Punicalaginin. The best mined compounds are the ones that are also recognized generally as safe and depict the best possible candidacy for a drug against the Y. pseudotuberculosis. For this purpose, ADMET profiling was done to assess the safety and the need for a compound to be exploited for drug development. We believe that these findings will be valuable for researchers aiming to design inhibitors against the Yersinia group of pathogens.