https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resmic.2020.103794
Title: Bacteriophages that infect Gram-negative bacteria as source of signal-arrest-release motif lysins
Abstract: Treatment of infections caused by multidrug-resistant (MDR) Gram-negative bacteria is challenging, a potential solution for which is the use of bacteriophage-derived lytic enzymes. However, the exogenous action of bacteriophage lysins against Gram-negative bacteria is hindered due to the presence of an impermeable outer membrane in these bacteria. Nevertheless, recent research has demonstrated that some lysins are capable of permeating the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria with the help of signal peptides. In the present study, we investigated the genomes of 309 bacteriophages that infect Gram-negative pathogens of clinical interest in order to determine the evolutionary markers of signal peptide-containing lysins. Complete genomes displayed 265 putative lysins, of which 17 (6.41%) contained signal-arrest-release motifs and 41 (15.47%) contained cleavable signal peptides. There was no apparent relationship between host specificity and lysin diversity. Nevertheless, the evolution of lysin genes might not be independent of the rest of the bacteriophage genome once pan-genome clustering and lysin diversity appear to be correlated. In addition, signal peptide- and signal-arrest-release-containing lysins were monophyletically distributed in the protein cladogram, suggesting that the natural selection of holin-independent lysins is divergent. Our study screened 58 (21.89%) out of 265 potential candidates for
in vitro experimentation against MDR bacteria. Introduction ESKAPE is an acronym for Enterococcus faecium , Staphylococcus aureus , Klebsiella pneumoniae , Acinetobacter baumannii , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and Enterobacter spp., multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria that are considered to be the main causative agents of nosocomial infections [ 1 ]. Within the Enterobacter genus, multidrug resistance is prevalent in Enterobacter cloacae [ 2 ]. The infections caused by Gram-negative bacteria ( K. pneumoniae , A. baumannii , P. aeruginosa , and E. cloacae ) are even more concerning due to the presence of both intrinsic (low outer membrane permeability) and/or acquired (horizontal gene transfer) mechanisms of antibiotic resistance [ 3 ]. In addition to ESKAPE pathogens, multidrug resistance has also been observed in Salmonella enterica Typhimurium [ 4 ] and Helicobacter pylori [ 5 ] strains .
Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance include inactivation and/or alteration of the antibiotic structure, modification of drug-binding sites, changes in cell permeability, biosynthesis of efflux pumps, and biofilm formation [ 1 ]. Genes responsible for these antibiotic resistance mechanisms can be found on bacterial chromosome, plasmids, and transposons [ 6 ]. Resistance to β-lactams, aminoglycosides, quinolones, tigecyclines, and polymyxins has been reported for K. pneumoniae [ 7 ]. A. baumannii is resistant to aminoglycosides, β-lactams, carbapenems, fluoroquinolones, and tetracyclines [ 8 ]. Furthermore, P. aeruginosa is resistant to a variety of antibiotics, including aminoglycosides, quinolones, and β-lactams [ 9 ]. E. cloacae is resistant to β-lactams and quinolones [ 2 ], as is S. enterica Typhimurium [ 4 , 10 ]. H. pylori is resistant to β-lactams, quinolones, and, less frequently, aminoglycosides and macrolides [ 11 ].
Bacterial viruses or bacteriophages (phages), were discovered in 1915 by Frederick Twort upon evaluating cultures of S. aureus [ 12 ]. However, bacteriophages were first used to combat bacterial infections by Felix d’Herelle [ 13 ], who is considered the father of phage therapy. Despite positive results in the control of pathogenesis in humans, increasing efficiency of antibiotics waned the interest in phage therapy [ 14 , 15 ]. Nevertheless, emergence of MDR bacteria has now highlighted bacteriophages as the antibacterial agents of the 21st century. Several studies have evaluated the applications of bacteriophages to control bacteria, including phage therapy in animals [ 16 ], encapsulated phages for phage therapy improvement [ 17 ], and phages as food sanitizers [ 18 ]. More recent studies have highlighted the importance of bacteriophage genome sequencing in the identification of bacteriophage-derived lytic enzymes [ 19 ].
Bacteriophages replicate in the cytoplasm of prokaryotic cells and release viral progeny through the hydrolysis of the peptidoglycan (PG) layer of bacteria, except in the case of filamentous phages [ 20 , 21 ]. Cleavage of PG is caused by phage lysins, proteins encoded by the phage genome [ 20 ]. Bacteriophage-derived lytic enzymes target specific bonds in the PG layer ( Fig. 1 ) [ 22 ]. In the canonical lysis system, lysins accumulate in the cytoplasm until disruption of the cytoplasmic membrane by holins and antiholins, followed by consequent exposure of the PG layer [ 23 , 24 ]. Bacteriophages that infect Gram-negative bacteria, in particular, also encode spanins, proteins that form junctions between the inner and outer membranes of bacteria to permit viral progeny release [ 25 ]. On the other hand, the holin-lysin association is not mandatory for lysin export to the periplasm. Signal peptide (SP)-containing lysins, for example, have a cleavable SP that controls release of lysins into the periplasm through the host Sec machinery [ 26 , 27 ]. Furthermore, signal-arrest-release (SAR)-containing lysins are also exported to the periplasm space via Sec -dependent translocation, while the SP remains in the lysin active form [ 28 ]. SAR-lysins accumulate as inactive proteins embedded in the inner membrane until further membrane depolarisation by pinholins [ 29 ]. Pinholins are involved in lysin activation instead of export [ 28 ]. Thus, SP- and SAR-lysins act on the PG without the requirement for pore formation by holins.
The mechanisms related to the exogenous action of lysins on Gram-negative bacteria remain unclear. However, SP- and SAR-containing lysins might represent a promising source of new antimicrobials. In the present study, we report a comprehensive analysis of the lysin repertoire of bacteriophages that infect Gram-negative pathogens of clinical interest, while focusing on holin-independent lysins found in sequenced genomes of bacteriophages that infect Klebsiella spp., Acinetobacter spp., Pseudomonas spp., Enterobacter spp., Salmonella spp., and Helicobacter spp.
Materials and methods Data sets We evaluated bacteriophages that infect the genera of Gram-negative bacteria frequently associated with multidrug resistance: Klebsiella spp., Acinetobacter spp., Pseudomonas spp., Enterobacter spp., Salmonella spp., and Helicobacter spp. We evaluated bacterial genus-specific bacteriophages to cover a wide range of bacterial genomes. The sequence database was constructed by gathering completely assembled bacteriophage genomes from the NCBI genome database [ 30 ] in March 2020. The initial database comprised of 1276 bacteriophage genomes. We selected representative sequences using CD-HIT Suite [ 32 ] while employing default parameters to reduce the number of genomes to a final set of 309. A genome search was carried out to identify previously annotated endolysins. Genomes were subjected to BLASTP analysis [ 31 ] to identify new undiscovered proteins using standard parameters with an E-value cut-off of 1e-5. The accession numbers of these are listed in Table S1 .
Bacteriophage genomic clustering We identified and functionally annotated the open reading frames of publicly available genomes using Prokka version 1.14.6 [ 32 ] with a sequence identity cut-off of 90% and a bandwidth of alignment of 20. We used Roary version 3.11.2 [ 33 ] for pan-genome construction using the translated protein sequences. The BLASTP percentage identity used in the search for orthologs was 70%, in order to overlap with the bacteriophage genetic diversity. The final trees were built based on the binary presence and absence of genes in the accessory genome and visualised using FigTree version 1.4.4 ( http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/ ).
Gram-negative lysin signal peptide search There is still limited clarity on the molecular markers that can be used to differentiate exolysins and endolysins. Thus, we evaluated bacteriophage lysins in general. We clustered the protein sequences using CD-HIT Suite [ 34 ], with default parameters. The representative proteins were screened using the HHpred webserver [ 35 ] and Protein family (Pfam) and Cluster of Orthologous Groups (COG) databases with an E-value cut-off of 1e-5 and at least 80% query coverage. We characterised the SP-containing lysins, as described by Oliveira et al. [ 36 ]. The proteins in the database were screened using SignalP [ 37 ] and PrediSi [ 38 ] to identify the SPs. In addition, we also screened transmembrane domains using SOSUI [ 39 ], TMHMM [ 40 ], Phobius [ 41 ], and Topcons [ 42 ]. Putative lysins containing transmembrane domains comprising between 40% and 60% of Glycine and/or Alanine and 0 to 2 basic residues (Arginine, Lysine, and Histidine) [ 43 ] were annotated as presenting a putative SAR domain.
Lysin cladogram We constructed a lysin cladogram, using the method adapted by Gontijo et al. [ 44 ] for protein sequences. The protein sequences were aligned using MAFFT version 7.450 [ 45 ]. The alignment was trimmed using Gblocks Server version 0.91 [ 46 ]. We then used ProtTest version 3.4.2 [ 47 ] to obtain the rtREV + I + G + F amino acid substitution model. We used MrBayes version 3.2.6 [ 48 ] to generate the cladogram using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo method with 5,000,000 generations and a sampling frequency of 1000. The final tree was visualised using FigTree version 1.4.4 ( http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/ ).
Results General characteristics of the bacteriophage genomes Genomes of 309 bacteriophages were divided according to the following genera: Klebsiella (n = 36), Acinetobacter (n = 39), Pseudomonas (n = 121), Enterobacter (n = 12), Salmonella (n = 98), and Helicobacter (n = 3) phages. The genomes were retrieved from bacteriophages isolated from several sources; primarily clinical isolates associated with multidrug resistant outbreaks. All viruses belonged to the order Caudovirales , distributed in the families Ackermannviridae (n = 8), Myoviridae (n = 108), Podoviridae (n = 100), and Siphoviridae (n = 93), and several subfamilies and/or genera ( Table S1 ). These features are expected to provide a broad perspective on the genetic diversity of lysins acting on Gram-negative bacteria associated with nosocomial infections. All phages had a linear or circular double-stranded DNA genome and the overall genome architecture of the evaluated phages is currently available at GenBank under the respective accession numbers ( Table S1 ). Our work revealed 64 (24.15%) unannotated lysins through Prokka genome annotation ( Table S2 ).
Grouping of the bacteriophages based on pan-genome analysis Comparative genomic analysis was carried out to establish the genetic relatedness of bacteriophages that infect the genera of Gram-negative bacteria most frequently associated with nosocomial infections. The bacteriophage accessory genome was chosen once no orthologous genes were found in the core genome. Thus, the binary matrix of the presence/absence of genes in the dispensable genome was used in the phage classification scheme. Based on the pan-genome analysis, the set of bacteriophages was divided into seven main clusters ( Fig. 2 ; Fig. S1 ). Cluster A was comprised of two Salmonella phages; Cluster B - 14 Salmonella phages and 1 Enterobacter phage; Cluster C - 11 Salmonella phages; Cluster D - 24 phages, including 13 Klebsiella , 5 Salmonella , 4 Enterobacter , and 2 Acinetobacter phages; Cluster E - 21 monophyletic Pseudomonas phages ; Clade F - two monophyletic taxa, one comprised of 38 Pseudomonas phages and the other comprised of 26 Acinetobacter phages. Clade G, the most diverse taxon, was comprised of the remaining set of phages (n = 172), including 66 Salmonella , 62 Pseudomonas , 23 Klebsiella , 11 Acinetobacter , 7 Enterobacter , and 3 Helicobacter phages.
Clusters A and B were comprised of bacteriophages belonging to the Siphoviridae family and the Guernseyvirinae subfamily. Cluster C was comprised of phages belonging to the Podoviridae family and Lederbergvirus genus or to the Siphoviridae and Nonagvirus genera. Cluster D was comprised of phages belonging to two families ( Myoviridae and Siphoviridae ), three subfamilies ( Tevenvirinae , Tunavirinae , and Ttevenvirinae ), and at least five different genera ( Karamvirus , Eclunavirus , Slopekvirus , Webervirus , and Gelderlandvirus ). Cluster E was comprised of phages belonging to the Myoviridae family and two genera ( Pakpunavirus and Nankokuvirus ). Cluster F was comprised of phages belonging to the Podoviridae , Myoviridae , and Siphoviridae families. Cluster G was comprised of phages belonging to all four phage families evaluated in this study ( Ackermannviridae , Myoviridae , Podoviridae , and Siphoviridae ).
Lysin diversity and domain architectures Based on Prokka annotation, a set of 265 lysin-coding sequences was identified among the 309 bacteriophage genomes analysed in this study ( Table S2 ). The majority (n = 262) of the bacteriophages encoded one lysin-coding sequence in their genomes (84.79%), while S. enterica bacteriophages SEN34, 7–11, and SE1 presented two putative lysin genes. The other 47 phages (15.21%) did not encode putative lysins, which highlights the need for extensive genomic research on bacteriophage genomics in order to elucidate cell lysis-associated proteins, in particular for H. pylori bacteriophages.
We classified the lysins into 5 groups according to their catalytic domain ( Table 1 ) muramidases (PF00959, PF05838, PF11860, and COG4678), glucosaminidases (PF01832, PF00182, PF00062, and PF13199), amidases (PF01510, PF01520, PF12671, and PF07486), peptidases (PF02557), transglycosylases (PF06737, COG4623, and COG0741), and two domains of unknown function (PF10828 and PF03245). Furthermore, we identified 3 peptidoglycan-binding domains (PF01476, COG3409, and PF09374) in 18 (6.79%) lysins. Detailed information regarding these can be found in Table S2 .
Muramidases: These enzymes hydrolyse the β-(1,4) linkages between N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic (NAM) acid monomers of PG [ 49 ]. Muramidases were the most abundant lysin type (54.34%; n = 144), with PF00959 being the most representative protein family.
Glucosaminidases : These enzymes hydrolyse the β-(1,4) glycosidic linkages between NAG and the adjacent NAM acid [ 50 ]. This catalytic domain was the second most abundant among the lysins encoded by bacteriophages that infect select Gram-negative bacteria, representing 57 (21.51%) lysins.
Amidases : Amidases hydrolyse the bond between the NAM residue of the carbohydrate backbone of PG and l -alanine of the peptide chains responsible for cross-linking of adjacent polysaccharide chains [ 51 ]. A total of 24 (9.06%) lysins were predicted to have an amidase catalytic domain.
Endopeptidases : All peptidases act on the cross-linked peptide chains on the PG layer [ 51 ]. Peptidases comprised 17 (6.42%) of the identified lysins, all of which corresponded to the VanY conserved catalytic domain (PF02557).
Transglycosylases: These enzymes cleave the β-(1,4) linkages between the same glycosidic bonds between alternating NAM and NAG [ 50 ]. The transglycosylase catalytic domain was identified in 15 (5.66%) out of the 265 lysins evaluated.
Holin-independent lysins Among the 265 lysins annotated in the analysed genomes, 15.47% (n = 41) were predicted to have SPs at the N-terminal region of the protein according to SignalP ( Table S3 ) and Pre-diSi ( Table S4 ). In addition, 6.42% (n = 17) were predicted to have transmembrane signal peptides known as SAR. Lysins containing predicted SPs that were further characterised as SAR-lysins were retrieved from the SP-lysin list. The SAR-lysins harboured transmembrane domains located at the N-terminal region, predicted using SOSUI ( Table S5 ), TMHMM ( Table S6 ), Phobius ( Table S7 ), and Topcons ( Table S8 ), a high content of Glycine and/or Alanine (from 40% to 60%), and a maximum of two basic residues (Arginine, Lysine, and/or Histidine) [ 43 ]. Multiple sequence alignments of the SPs identified in SP- and SAR-lysins are shown in Figs. 3 and 4 , respectively. SP-lysins were primarily encoded by Pseudomonas phages (n = 21), followed by Klebsiella (n = 10), Salmonella (n = 8), Enterobacter (n = 1), and Acinetobacter (n = 1) phages. On the other hand, Klebsiella bacteriophages encode majorly SAR-lysins (n = 7), followed by Salmonella (n = 5), Pseudomonas (n = 4), and Enterobacter (n = 1) phages. Considering the size of the phage population corresponding to each bacterial host, 47.22% (n = 17) of the Klebsiella phages encode holin-independent lysins, followed by Pseudomonas (20.66%; n = 25), Enterobacter (16.67%; n = 2), Salmonella (13.26%; n = 13), and Acinetobacter (2.56%; n = 1) phages. The reason why some bacteriophages primarily encode holin-independent lysins remains unclear.
Holin-independent lysins are encoded by bacteriophages from clusters C and D, derived from the same branch, and F and G, also derived from the same branch. Interestingly, SAR-containing lysins are only encoded by bacteriophages from clusters C and G, while SP-containing lysins are encoded by bacteriophages from all four clusters holin-independent lysins.
Phylogenetic analysis of bacteriophage lysins Homolog identification using HHpred ( Table S2 ) clustered the 265 lysins into 18 orthologous groups (OGs) based on the Pfam and COG databases ( Fig. 5 ). All annotated lysins were validated as true lysins through the evaluation of the presence of typical lysin domains (muramidases, glucosaminidases, amidases, peptidases, and transglycosylases) or close phylogenetic relationships between putative lysins, particularly in the cases of lysins containing the domains PF03245 and PF00182 of unknown function. We have taken into consideration the degree of genetic diversity among the bacteriophages that infect six different bacterial species by evaluating the best amino acid substitution model using ProtTest [ 47 ] to construct an accurate and more reliable lysin cladogram ( Fig. 5 ). Proteins assigned to the same OGs displayed similar domain architectures and were clustered into monophyletic groups, except for lysins from the PF03245 family, which were allocated to two distinct groups in the cladogram. Lysins with catalytic domains identified in the same OGs were distributed into a monophyletic taxon. However, lysins possessing the same domain type were polyphyletically distributed in the cladogram, which suggests a convergent evolution among different families of lysins, leading to similar mechanisms of PG hydrolysis. Muramidase lysins, for example, were classified into four families that were distributed into different clades ( Fig. 5 ).
Discussion Antibiotic resistance is one of the biggest threats to global health in the post-antibiotic era and bacteriophage therapy. Controlled application of active virions as antimicrobials is a promising alternative to antibiotics [ 52–56 ]. The use of bacteriophage lysins, in particular, has several advantages over the direct application of bacteriophages, such as: (i) broad-spectrum host specificity; (ii) bacterial lysis as a function of lysin concentration; (iii) action on quiescent and growing cells; (iv) no report of bacterial resistance to lysins; (v) high permeability of biofilms; (vi) lower degree of neutralisation by antibiotics; (vii) relatively stable; (viii) well-defined pharmacokinetics; and (ix) several possibilities for synergistic applications [ 57 ].
Generation of extensive bacteriophage genetic knowledge can improve the screening of lysins with potential action against Gram-negative bacteria prior to in vitro and in vivo experimentation. The 309 bacteriophages evaluated were grouped based on pan-genome analysis. Absence of a core-genome within the set of bacteriophage genomes could be explained by the high genetic diversity observed in bacteriophages, especially when considering bacteriophages that act on different Gram-negative bacterial genera. Bacteriophage genetic diversity is driven by consecutive events of genetic exchange that serve as an adaptive response to the selective pressure of their respective bacterial hosts [ 58 ]. The high genetic diversity observed in bacteriophages can be attributed to their ancient origin (3 billion years of constant evolution), the high number of phages present in both artificial and natural environments, and the constant infection in bacterial hosts. Bacteriophages may acquire or share genes from bacteria and/or prophages through homologous recombination or non-homologous site-specific recombination [ 58–60 ]. However, there is no report to date that endolysin genes have been acquired from bacteria. On the contrary, it is believed that endolysin genes have independently evolved for the purpose of degrading the cell wall structures of their bacterial hosts, to improve bacteriophage fitness [ 36 , 61 , 62 ]. Despite the absence of core-genomes, the pan-genome considers the entire set of genes of different phages, and the information concerning the presence/absence of gene groups is precisely for phage grouping and phage classification [ 63–65 ]. The clustering of phages that infect different Gram-negative bacteria is aimed to determine the diversity of lysins produced by phages, in order to verify possible associations between lysin diversity and host specificity and/or pan-genome clustering.
The set of 309 bacteriophages encoded 265 putative lysins, which could be further divided into five catalytic domain types based on their amino acid sequences: (i) muramidases (n = 144), (ii) glucosaminidases (n = 57), (iii) amidases (n = 24), (iv) endopeptidases (n = 17), and (v) transglycosylases (n = 15). Eight putative lysins had catalytic domains with an unclear function. Investigation of the association between the OGs and predicted bacterial hosts revealed that there is no clear association between domain architecture and bacterial host, suggesting that the natural selection of the bacterial host in the evolution of lysins results in a wider set of domain distribution instead of a selection of specific domains for specific bacterial genera. A study evaluating the diversity of the lysins encoded by Pseudomonas phages revealed that transglycosylases and glucosaminidases are encoded by phages from the same cluster [ 66 ]. However, Fernández-Ruiz et al. [ 67 ] suggested that the distribution pattern of lysin domains might be related to cell wall structure (mycoplasmas, Gram-negative, and Gram-positive) and not bacterial species due to the conservation of the structure of the cell wall. All the lysins evaluated in this study were encoded by bacteriophages that act on bacteria with the same cell wall structure, which could explain the widespread domain distribution.
Furthermore, we observed that bacteriophage genomic clustering was associated with genetic features such as family, subfamily, and genus. However, we observed some correlation between lysin domain variability and bacteriophage genetic clustering ( Fig. S2 , Table S2 ). Interestingly, lysin clustering using CD-HIT Suite was similar to pan-genomic clustering. Putative lysins in the same protein cluster belonged to phages in the same pan-genome cluster. In fact, the evolution of bacterial genes responds to selective pressures that favour competition and niche adaptation [ 68 , 69 ], and the interactions between bacteria and bacteriophages tend to expand the genetic repertoire of both the entities [ 70 ]. However, a study performed by Oakley et al. [ 71 ] compared the genomes of four closely related Clostridium perfringens bacteriophages and observed that despite genomic conservation, lysins have significant variability and specificity even within closely related genomes. They also observed that lysins are probably subjected to different selective pressures than the rest of the genome. Nevertheless, the combination of the results of this study and previous studies suggests that intraspecific selective pressure might lead to the selection of some lysin domains and that lysin diversity and pan-genome clustering of bacteriophages that infect Gram-negative bacteria appear to be correlated.
Among the SP-containing lysins, 16 out of the 17 SAR-lysins and 26 out of the 41 SP-lysins presented a muramidase catalytic domain. Two of the 24 amidases and six of the 15 transglycosylases contained a SP at the N-terminal region. Of the 17 SAR-lysins predicted, 94.12% (n = 16) contained the lysozyme domain (PF00959), which suggests that this type of peptidoglycan hydrolase is the most ancient, as well as most abundant. Similar results have been reported previously [ 36 ]. On the other hand, SP-lysins present several types of catalytic domains. Some conserved amino acids were observed upon aligning the amino acid sequences of the signal at the N-terminal portion of SP-lysins ( Fig. 3 ). Similar results were observed for SAR-lysins as well ( Fig. 4 ).
Only a few of the lysins presented SP or SAR sequences (15.47% and 6.42%, respectively) and these displayed restricted evolutionary distribution in the cladogram; these were found only in monophyletic groups, either comprising only SP- or SAR-lysins or a mix of both signal sequences within the same monophyletic taxa. Our study also revealed that holin-independent lysins are monophyletic and might have evolved from similar natural selection mechanisms despite the taxonomy of the bacterial hosts. This result suggests that the natural selection of holin-independent lysins might be divergent. SAR-lysins, in particular, appear to be mostly encoded by Klebsiella phages, which were all allocated to the same monophyletic clade.
Identification of SP-lysins is important as these have potential application for exogenous action against gram-negative bacteria, which is hindered by the low permeability of the lipopolysaccharide membrane. The lysin produced by the Salmonella bacteriophage SPN9CC, one of the predicted SAR-lysins in this study, has previously been evaluated in vitro against Gram-negative ( S. enterica , Escherichia coli , P. aeruginosa , Pseudomonas putida , Shigella boydii , Shigella flexneri , Vibrio fischeri , and Vibrio vulnificus ) and Gram-positive ( Listeria monocytogenes , Listeria innocua , S. aureus , S. epidermidis , Bacillus cereus , Lactobacillus brevis , Lactococcus lactis , and Pediococcus acidilactici ) bacteria [ 72 ]. All Gram-negative strains were lysed by the lysin, while none of the Gram-positive strains were lysed due to the intrinsic properties of the lytic enzyme. The antibacterial activity of SAR-lysin on E. coli cells was observed at a concentration of 300 μg ml −1 . Some authors have already reported that the exogenous antibacterial action of lysins in the absence of outer membrane permeabilisers might be due to the presence of C-terminal amphipathic helix domains that allow for outer membrane penetration [ 73 , 74 ]. Nevertheless, in the case of SPN9CC lysin, the SAR domain plays a major role in the antibacterial activity. SPN9CC recombinant lysin with deletions in the SAR sequences (amino acids 2–16, 2–17, or 2–18) showed no lytic activity against E. coli cells, suggesting that the SAR domain of the SPN9CC lysin is probably involved in outer membrane permeation [ 72 ].
Further studies that focus on the antimicrobial potential of SP-containing lysins must be conducted. Special attention could be given to SAR-lysins, as the presence of transmembrane domains might be related to outer membrane permeation. The combination of the results found in this study and the potential claim that SAR-lysins act exogenously on the PG highlight the set of lysins found in this study as potential candidates for new antimicrobial drugs. The present study revealed 58 (21.89% of a total of 265) SP- (n = 41), or SAR (n = 17) motif-containing candidates for in vitro experimentation against Gram-negative bacteria, including MDR strains.
Declaration of competing interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.