https://doi.org/10.1139/cjm-2020-0508
A review of the taxonomy, genetics, and biology of the genus Escherichia and the type species Escherichia coli
Abstract Historically, bacteriologists have relied heavily on biochemical and structural phenotypes for bacterial taxonomic classification. However, advances in comparative genomics have led to greater insights into the remarkable genetic diversity within the microbial world, and even within well-accepted species such as Escherichia coli. The extraordinary genetic diversity in E. coli recapitulates the evolutionary radiation of this species in exploiting a wide range of niches (i.e., ecotypes), including the gastrointestinal system of diverse vertebrate hosts as well as non-host natural environments (soil, natural waters, wastewater), which drives the adaptation, natural selection, and evolution of intragenotypic conspecific specialism as a strategy for survival. Over the last few years, there has been increasing evidence that many E. coli strains are very host (or niche)-specific. While biochemical and phylogenetic evidence support the classification of E. coli as a distinct species, the vast genomic (diverse pan-genome and intragenotypic variability), phenotypic (e.g., metabolic pathways), and ecotypic (host-/niche-specificity) diversity, comparable to the diversity observed in known species complexes, suggest that E. coli is better represented as a complex. Herein we review the taxonomic classification of the genus Escherichia and discuss how phenotype, genotype, and ecotype recapitulate our understanding of the biology of this remarkable bacterium.
Introduction In 1884, Theodor Escherich identified a common commensal of the gastrointestinal tract, isolated from the fecal material of neonates and early infants, which he termed Bacterium coli commune (Escherich 1988 [English translation of his original work]). Originally designated as Bacillus coli in 1895, this bacterium was renamed Escherichia coli after its original discoverer in 1919, after which the revised nomenclature was officially recognized in 1958 thereby establishing Escherichia as a genus, with E. coli as the first species (Henry 2015). Since its discovery, E. coli has been one of the most-studied and best-characterized microorganisms, serving as one of the fundamental model systems in microbiology. While E. coli has been subject to extensive genotypic and phenotypic (biochemical) examination, and as such remains the best-characterized and the representative type species within the genus, the other Escherichia species have only relatively recently been characterized. As such, the taxonomic status of the rest of the genus has experienced considerable flux as conventional molecular diagnostic tools underlying classification schemes progressed from predominantly biochemical methods to genotype- and genome-based techniques. In this review, we explore the changes to the taxonomic structure of the genus Escherichia in response to the development of new diagnostic methods, providing pertinent information for the characterization of novel Escherichia lineages and the re-assignment of early-discovered Escherichia “species”. We then explore the great genetic and biological diversity of the type species E. coli that is reflected in its extensive host- and niche-specificity. Given the incredible genotypic diversity exhibited by this bacterium, and taking into consideration the importance of phenotypic and ecotypic information in understanding bacterial taxonomy, we suggest that E. coli may be more appropriately described as a complex.
An overview of the genus Escherichia Overview of the genus Escherichia Biochemical analyses were the sole means by which early identification of novel Escherichia species were evaluated. Leclerc (1962) observed characteristic biochemical properties of a particular group of Escherichia strains based on an indole, methyl-red, Voges–Proskauer, and citrate reaction (IMViC test) profiles that prompted their classification as a new species termed E. adecarboxylata. Later, the biochemical characterization of a unique group of bacterial strains isolated from the hindgut of the Oriental cockroach (Blatta orientalis) led to their designation of a new species known as E. blattae (Burgess et al. 1973). Further analyses of the biochemical boundaries defining the E. coli species revealed several additional atypical groups that appeared to be distinct species in the family Enterobactericeae. One atypical group, Enteric Group 1, was commonly associated with wound infections in humans, while another atypical group, Enteric Group 11, was commonly isolated from clinical specimens. Both atypical groups were found to consist of yellow-pigmented enteric strains capable of growing on cyanide (KCN)-containing media and metabolizing cellobiose, distinguishing them as distinct species from E. coli. These two atypical groups were differentiated according to their decarboxylase reaction profiles, positive melibiose and malonate reactions, and negative indole reaction. As such, Enteric Group 1 and Enteric Group 11 were proposed to be separate species in the family Enterobacteriaceae, renamed Escherichia vulneris and E. hermannii, respectively (Brenner et al. 1982a, 1982b). Similarly, the characterization of the distinct biochemical profile of atypical Enteric Group 10, also associated with clinical samples from humans, prompted the reclassification of this group as another distinct Escherichia species, E. fergusonii (Farmer et al. 1985).
While the early identification of novel Escherichia species relied on the differentiation of closely-related groups of Enterobacteriaceae through biochemical means, the development of genotypic and genomic diagnostic tools provided additional means for the further discrimination of Escherichia species. For instance, after identifying the biochemical profile characteristic of the Escherichia genus (Janda et al. 1999; Abbott et al. 2003), the results from DNA–DNA hybridization and 16S rDNA sequencing analyses, together with the identification of virulence genes (e.g., the enteropathogenic E. coli-specific eaeA gene and the Shigella-specific phoE gene), prompted the reclassification of a group of strains initially named Hafnia alvei, as a separate Escherichia species named E. albertii (Huys et al. 2003). Subsequent whole-genome sequencing and average nucleotide identity (ANI) analyses have since supported the reclassification of E. albertii as a distinct taxon within Escherichia (Ooka et al. 2015). More recently, alongside biochemical analyses, phylogenetic approaches utilizing the 16S rRNA gene and core genome sequences classified a group of enterobacterial strains isolated from fecal samples of the Himalayan marmot (Marmota himalayana) as a novel Escherichia species, E. marmotae (Liu et al. 2015, 2019).
Beyond the identification of novel host-associated Escherichia species, the growth of genetic sequence-based diagnostic methods also proved essential for the characterization of a distinct set of strains commonly associated with non-host environments that, while phenotypically indistinguishable from E. coli, appear to represent genetically divergent, “cryptic” Escherichia lineages. Traditional biochemical tests fail to distinguish these cryptic lineages from E. coli (Walk et al. 2009), but multilocus sequence typing (MLST)-based phylogenetic analyses have identified 5 monophyletic groups of cryptic strains distinct from E. coli, termed Escherichia clades I–V (Walk et al. 2009; Clermont et al. 2011a). A growing body of evidence suggests that these cryptic clades, especially clades III and V, consist of strains that are native residents of natural environments. Reflecting this, comparative genomic and physiological studies have demonstrated cryptic strains to be particularly adapted to non-host environments. For instance, cryptic strains possess several genes, such as those for diol utilization and lysozyme production, which are commonly associated with environmental survival, while simultaneously lacking genes, including those related to antibiotic resistance, adhesins, and sugar transporters, which are commonly associated with gastrointestinal colonization (Luo et al. 2011). Physiologically, the cryptic lineages are also capable of growing at lower temperatures and forming robust biofilms compared with other Escherichia species, both of which are suggested to enhance survival in external environments (Ingle et al. 2011). There is relatively strong support for the designation of the cryptic clades as ecologically distinct subpopulations within the genus Escherichia (Ingle et al. 2011). Indeed, while clade I does appear to be a divergent subgroup of E. coli, MLST and ANI data indicate that the cryptic clades may comprise novel Escherichia species, one consisting of clades III and IV, and another consisting of clade V (Walk 2015; Beghain et al. 2018). Importantly, while the cryptic clades appear to be predominantly associated with natural environments, they have also been identified in a variety of animal hosts, particularly birds (Clermont et al. 2011a; Blyton et al. 2015).
As the type species of the genus, the classification of E. coli has remained stable since its discovery; however, the taxonomic status of the rest of the genus has experienced considerable flux. While early Escherichia species were identified based on the characterization of biochemical profiles resembling that of E. coli, they were later determined, through genotypic and genomic analyses, to be phylogenetically distant from the rest of the genus. For instance, DNA hybridization analyses demonstrated that E. adecarboxylata was genetically distantly related to other Enterobacteriaceae species, leading to its reclassification as Leclercia adecarboxylata (Tamura et al. 1986). 16S rRNA sequencing analysis indicated that E. blattae was incorrectly classified within the Escherichia genus, and corroborating MLST analyses prompted its transfer to another genus, and it was renamed Shimwellia blattae (Priest and Barker 2010). More recently, the designation of E. vulneris and E. hermannii as Escherichia species have also come into question. Indeed, further extensive biochemical profiling has revealed that E. hermannii consists of a group of yellow-pigmented, lysine decarboxylase-negative strains capable of growing on KCN media — a biochemical profile distinct from other Escherichia species (Hata et al. 2016). Reflecting this, multilocus sequencing analysis (MLSA)-based phylogenetic approaches using 10 hypervariable housekeeping proteins clustered E. hermannii strains separately from the Escherichia genus, prompting its proposed reclassification into a novel genus, Atlantibacter, with the species designation A. hermannii (Hata et al. 2016). Similarly, biochemical interrogation of E. vulneris revealed a distinct ornithine decarboxylase, arginine dihydrolase, and lysine decarboxylase reaction profile compared with other Escherichia species, which was later corroborated by separate phylogenomic analyses utilizing core genome and conserved Gammaproteobacteria sequences clustering E. vulneris separately from the Escherichia genus. In line with this evidence, using an approach identifying characteristic molecular markers referred to as conserved signature indels (CSI) in key Enterobacteriaceae proteins, Alnajar and Gupta (2017) demonstrated that E. vulneris did not harbor any of the CSI markers specific to the Escherichia genus, justifying its transfer to a novel genus, Pseudescherichia, and redesignation as P. vulneris.
The development of genotype- and genome-based diagnostic tools has also contributed to current understandings of the taxonomic relationship between Shigella, a previously unique species in the family Enterobacteriaceae, and E. coli. Upon its discovery in 1898 by Kiyoshi Shiga, the dysentery-causing bacillus was originally classified in the same tentative genus as Bacillus coli (now E. coli), where it was named Bacillus dysenteriae (Trofa et al. 1999). Despite their apparent relatedness, the distinct antigenic properties of these strains prompted their reclassification into a new genus, Shigella (Ewing 1949). This distinction has since been maintained based on the nonmotility, distinct biochemical profile, and patterns of pathogenesis characterizing the Shigella species (Van Den Beld and Reubsaet 2012). Although the morphological and biochemical evidence support the designation of Shigella as a unique genus, sequence-based diagnostic methods reveal a considerably high degree of relatedness between Shigella and E. coli. Indeed, a variety of molecular methods, including 16S rRNA sequencing and MLST, fail to distinguish Shigella from E. coli (Devanga Ragupathi et al. 2018), while core-genome based phylogenetic approaches cluster Shigella and E. coli strains together (Zhou et al. 2010), suggesting that they represent a single species genetically. As such, although it remains a unique genus largely for clinical reasons, Shigella has been determined to be phylogenetically E. coli, and is essentially an E. coli pathovar (Van Den Beld and Reubsaet 2012).
Given the reclassification of many early-identified Escherichia species, and the cryptic Escherichia clades, there are now four recognized species within the genus: E. coli (including Shigella, as the type species), E. fergusonii, E. albertii, and E. marmotae (Fig. 1). Despite the ever-changing status of the other members of the genus, E. coli remains steadfast as the representative Escherichia species, supported by both biochemical and phylogenetic evidence. As demonstrated by the reclassification of L. adecarboxylata, S. blattae, A. hermannii, and P. vulneris, however, the diagnostic tools underlying current taxonomic schemes may fail to consider all criteria pertinent for classification. It has, however, been suggested that the current emphasis on genotype for the basis of bacterial taxonomy is too restrictive, and it fails to consider the importance of phenotype (Kämpfer 2014), the processes of speciation (Georgiades and Raoult 2011), and (as we argue) ecotype. Indeed, the intragenotypic and genomic variability (diversity in gene content and core- and pan-genome dynamics), diversity in lifestyles (pathogenic vs. commensal vs. naturalized), and wide range in host- and niche-specific E. coli strains (i.e., ecotypes) suggests that this bacterium may be better described as a species complex.
Biology of Escherichia coli Environmental and host niches of Escherichia coli Escherichia coli is one of the most well-characterized model microorganisms. The reference lab strain E. coli K-12 substrain MG1655 and its derivatives have played key roles in the advancement of several scientific fields, most notably the disciplines of microbiology, genetics, and molecular biology. Outside of the laboratory environment, the Gram-negative, non-sporulating facultative anaerobe comprises part of the vertebrate faecal microbiome, including those of mammals, birds, and reptiles (Gordon and Cowling 2003). Among the potential host species that E. coli can colonize, there is great variation in body size, gastrointestinal physiological and biochemical conditions, diets, and microbiome composition. Reflecting this, there is substantial variation in the prevalence of E. coli among these host species, which ranges from more than 90% in humans (Penders et al. 2006), to 56% in wild mammals, 23% in birds, and only 10% in reptiles (Gordon and Cowling 2003).
In the vertebrate gastrointestinal tract, commensal E. coli strains appear to reside in the mucus layer covering the epithelial cells along the tract, especially in the caecum and colon of the large intestine (Tenaillon et al. 2010). This overlying mucus layer is rich in mucin, which primarily consists of glycoproteins with various O-linked glycans (Marcobal et al. 2013), presenting a nutrient-rich niche enriched with adhesion sites conducive for E. coli colonization. While E. coli lacks the appropriate enzymatic complement to directly degrade the complex mucin-associated polysaccharides, the mucolytic activity of other commensal gastrointestinal anaerobes facilitates the release of key mono- and disaccharides for E. coli metabolism (Conway and Cohen 2015). Beyond acting as a carbon source, the mucin-associated O-linked glycans can also serve as ligands for E. coli pili/fimbriae and flagella to facilitate adhesion, initiating biofilm formation, and subsequently promoting colonization of the gastrointestinal tract (Sicard et al. 2017).
Because the gastrointestinal tract has been considered the primary niche of E. coli, strains isolated from natural sources were originally thought to be derived from feces discharged into the environment. Despite this, there is a growing body of evidence for distinct “naturalized” subpopulations of E. coli, separate from the cryptic Escherichia clades, which are specifically adapted to external environments. It is estimated that half of the total E. coli population can reside and transit in non-host, natural environments as secondary habitats (Tenaillon et al. 2010). Indeed, strains of E. coli have been reported to survive and, in some cases even grow, in a variety of natural environments, including subtropical and temperate soils (Ishii et al. 2006; Ishii et al. 2010; Byappanahalli et al. 2012), surface water and sediments (Jang et al. 2011, 2015), estuary water environments (Berthe et al. 2013), and even treated drinking water (Blyton and Gordon 2017). While it is possible that these environmentally associated strains could actually be host-derived, several studies have revealed that these subpopulations, isolated from a variety of external environmental contexts, are genotypically, phenotypically, and ultimately ecotypically distinct from enteric strains. For instance, fingerprinting analyses revealed that environmental strains isolated from subtropical and temperate soils displayed distinct rep-PCR DNA fingerprints compared with animal-associated strains (Byappanahalli et al. 2012). Similarly, specific strains of E. coli linked to coliform blooms in geographically separated lakes in Australia are characterized by unique genotypic profiles not recovered from enteric strains (Power et al. 2005). Phenotypically, these bloom-associated E. coli strains were characterized by the production of a group 1 capsule, which is thought to enhance environmental survival against stressors such as UV radiation and desiccation (Power et al. 2005). Similarly, through a comparative accessory gene fingerprinting approach, E. coli strains isolated from surface water and sediments were demonstrated to be distinctly enriched in genes associated with iron acquisition, complement resistance/surface exclusion, and biofilm formation compared with enteric strains (Tymensen et al. 2015). More recently, studies by Zhi et al. (2019) have characterized a phylogenetically distinct subgroup of E. coli that appears to have specifically adapted itself to reside and persist in wastewater matrices. Genetically, these “wastewater” strains appear to be very distinct because they carry unique biomarkers not observed in enteric strains or the cryptic clades.
Commensal and pathogenic Escherichia coli Normally, E. coli is a commensal in the vertebrate gastrointestinal tract; however, various strains have acquired virulence factors enabling them to become pathogenic in both humans and animals. Pathogenic strains are responsible for causing intestinal infections, which includes diarrheal diseases, as well as extra-intestinal infections causing disease such as urinary tract infections, sepsis, and meningitis (Bekal et al. 2003). The E. coli pathotypes include: (i) enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), associated with traveler’s diarrhea as well as diarrhea in porcine and bovine hosts (Kai et al. 2010); (ii) enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), associated with diarrhea in children and various animals (Kai et al. 2010); (iii) enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), including strains that produce Shiga toxin (STEC), associated with hemorrhagic colitis and hemolytic-uremic syndrome in humans (Kai et al. 2010); (iv) enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC), associated with persistent diarrhea in humans (Kai et al. 2010); (v) diffuse-adherent E. coli (DAEC), associated with acute diarrhea, particularly in young children (Scaletsky et al. 2002); (vi) enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) and Shigella, associated with invasive intestinal infections and dysentery in humans and various animals (Kai et al. 2010; Van Den Beld and Reubsaet 2012); (vii) adherent-invasive E. coli (AIEC), associated with the chronic inflammatory bowel condition Crohn’s Disease (Barnich and Darfeuille-Michaud 2007); and (viii) extra-intestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC), associated with three groups of strains including the uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) [causing urinary tract infections (Terlizzi et al. 2017)], the meningitic E. coli [such as neonatal meningitic E. coli (NMEC) causing meningitis in newborn infants (Wijetunge et al. 2015)], and bloodborne strains of E. coli (BBEC) [causing septicemia in humans and animals (Mokady et al. 2005)].
Some evidence suggests that several virulence genes associated with the various E. coli pathotypes, especially those involved in extra-intestinal disease, have evolved and are maintained by natural selection, owing to the other roles these genes also play in the ecology of commensal strains (Le Gall et al. 2007). For example, beyond their role in extra-intestinal virulence, genes encoding for adhesins, iron capture systems, toxins, and protectins have been identified in commensal strains of E. coli that successfully colonize the gastrointestinal tracts of humans (Wold et al. 1992; Nowrouzian et al. 2006), dogs (Johnson et al. 2008), and piglets (Schierack et al. 2008). Similarly, the adhesin intimin, which is associated with enteric pathogenicity, has also been shown to be essential for the colonization of the bovine rectal mucosa by bovine commensal strains (Sheng et al. 2006). More recently, Zhi et al. (2019) demonstrated that naturalized and cryptic strains of E. coli also possess many of these virulence genes (iron capture systems), suggesting that these so-called virulence genes in enteric strains may also be functionally relevant for survival outside the host environment.
The prevalence of these virulence genes among commensal populations is variable across host species. Globally, human commensal isolates are characterized by a higher prevalence of virulence genes than animal commensals. Furthermore, the prevalence of virulence genes among animal commensals increases with host body mass, likely reflecting an increasing host gut complexity correlated with larger body sizes (Escobar-Páramo et al. 2006). The presence of virulence genes in commensals, therefore, and their range in prevalence across different host species could reflect the role these genes have in enhancing the survival and adaptation of commensal strains to their local environment rather than virulence directly. Indeed, the selective pressures in the host gastrointestinal tract may promote the emergence and maintenance of virulence factors, indicating that commensal strains may serve as reservoirs for the evolution of pathogenic E. coli (Tenaillon et al. 2010). In this context, virulence genes may be considered as adaptive genes required for the survival of commensals or pathogens in a specific host or even for the survival of strains in certain ecological niches outside of the host environment.
Escherichia coli population genetics Early conceptions of E. coli as a clonal species The genetic structure of a bacterial species largely depends on the balance between mutation and recombination, where a clonal structure is observed when recombination is low and a panmictic structure is observed when recombination is high (Smith et al. 1993). Although E. coli is now known to occupy a broad range of niches and adopt a variety of lifestyles, early studies into its population structure led to the conception of E. coli as a largely clonal species.
Early genotyping analyses first suggested that E. coli consists of several distinct clonal lineages between which little recombination occurred. Conducting the first study using multilocus enzyme electrophoresis (MLEE) to measure variations in the electrophoretic mobility of enzymes from different E. coli strains isolated from various natural sources, Milkman (1973) determined that relatively little variation was observed in the 5 loci examined, which offered the first evidence of a clonal structure in E. coli. In a follow-up study, Selander and Levin (1980) also used MLEE to examine the electrophoretic mobility of 20 enzymes from 109 strains of E. coli. Although twice as much diversity was observed as in the study by Milkman (1973), it was still considerably less than expected if recombination was frequent. Subsequent studies using more extensive collections consisting of environmental and host-associated strains of E. coli produced similar results, in which similar or even identical electrophoretic profiles were obtained from geographically and temporally distinct isolates (Ochman et al. 1983; Ochman and Selander 1984a). Indeed, conclusions regarding the clonal population structure of E. coli corroborated early serotyping studies that identified the global, and nonrandom, distribution of certain E. coli serotypes (Orskov et al. 1976).
Based on the results of these early MLEE studies, a standard reference collection of E. coli strains, referred to as the ECOR (E. coli reference) collection, was established to represent the full diversity of the species. Strains were selected to maximize electrophoretic diversity, geographical distribution and host range, including both pathogenic (mainly UPEC) and commensal isolates from various animal hosts (Ochman and Selander 1984b). From this MLEE data, initial phylogenetic relationships were estimated, revealing that the isolates clustered into several major clusters (Chaudhuri and Henderson 2012). The major phylogenetic groups (A, B1, B2, D) identified via MLEE analysis on the ECOR collection, have since been supported across studies using a variety of methods, including restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) (Desjardins et al. 1995) and the Clermont phylogrouping method (Clermont et al. 2013).
Recombination in the E. coli genome Although several properties of the E. coli genome correlate well with the phylogenetic structure derived from the ECOR collection (Chaudhuri and Henderson 2012), enzyme electrophoresis data are ultimately limited in utility for phylogenetic analyses because different enzymes can exhibit similar electrophoretic mobility without significant sequence similarity (Bisercic et al. 1991). In contrast, nucleotide sequences allow for more refined phylogenetic analyses, because they provide detailed information for many loci at a time and are less likely to be influenced by convergence. Early studies attempting to construct phylogenetic trees using nucleotide sequence data focused on individual genes, producing widely disparate phylogenies that not only varied according to the gene sequences used, but were also discordant with the pre-existing MLEE-based ECOR phylogenetic tree. Reflecting this, a comparison of the disparate phylogenetic trees produced from the sequences of the trp, gnd, and phoA genes suggested the influence of homologous recombination at specific loci in the E. coli genome (Dykhuizen and Green 1991). Subsequent studies implicating the importance of homologous recombination supported the proposal that the E. coli genome largely consists of a vertically inherited “clonal frame” that is interrupted by short recombinational segments, resulting in a mosaic genomic structure (Milkman and Bridges 1990). This model suggested that only certain regions within the clonal frame are susceptible to recombination, although the level of recombination occurring in these regions is not sufficient to blur the phylogenetic signal.
As nucleotide sequencing became routine, MLST was proposed as an alternative method to discern bacterial phylogeny. MLST involves obtaining sequences from multiple housekeeping genes at distinct loci along the bacterial chromosome. As with MLEE, housekeeping genes are used because they are likely to be under strong purifying selection, and any observed variations are likely to be selectively neutral (Maiden et al. 1998). Early analyses with MLST data corroborated the phylogenetic relationships, with the inclusion of an additional phylogroup (group C), identified in earlier MLEE studies (Escobar-Páramo et al. 2004). However, other studies utilizing different gene sets (i.e., MLST schemas) produced phylogenetic trees that did not provide strong support for any of the phylogenetic group arrangements previously described (Turner et al. 2006; Wirth et al. 2006). This provided further evidence that recombination could be quite frequent in the E. coli genome, further challenging the proposed clonal population structure of the species. The theory that E. coli may not be clonal was further supported by the identification of strains that appeared to be hybrids between distinct phylogenetic groups (A•B1), or strains that had multiple sources of ancestry (Turner et al. 2006). The conflicting evidence from various MLST studies illustrated an important limitation of the use of MLST for phylogenetic studies, because the resulting evolutionary relationships produced are highly dependent on the ultimately arbitrary choice of genes in the MLST schema utilized for phylogenetic reconstruction.
Horizontal gene transfer and the E. coli genome Continuing advancements in sequencing technology permitted the sequencing and comparison of whole genomes. The ability to generate complete genomic sequences provided deep insight into the processes of E. coli genome evolution — in particular, with respect to the presence of horizontal gene transfer. Indeed, at the genome level, the most striking source of variation between genomes is in gene content, largely due to the acquisition and loss of genes.
Genes acquired through horizontal gene transfer are characterized by an atypical base composition, such as a different GC content, relative to the rest of a particular genome’s “native” genes. These variations are due to the distinct selective pressures experienced by different genomes leading to differing patterns of evolution, which are then reflected in the base composition of each genome’s respective genes (Chaudhuri and Henderson 2012). Importantly, however, these variations are best observed with recently-acquired genes, because they retain the base composition of the original genome and can still be identified as foreign within the new genome. Otherwise, horizontally acquired genes undergo the process of amelioration over time, where they eventually adopt the characteristics of the recipient genome as they become subject to the same evolutionary pressures that affect all genes in the recipient genome (Lawrence and Ochman 1997).
Initial assessments of the genomic sequence of E. coli K-12 MG1655, using a combined approach examining base composition and phylogenetic analyses, estimated that 24.5% of genes were acquired through horizontal transfer (Lawrence and Ochman 2002). The sequencing of additional genomes from other E. coli strains provided further evidence that a significant proportion of genes in a given E. coli genome have been laterally acquired. For instance, a comparison of the 5.5 Mb genome of E. coli O157:H7 EDL933 with the genome of E. coli K-12 MG1655 revealed a highly similar, shared core genomic backbone that was only 4.1 Mb in size (Hayashi et al. 2001; Perna et al. 2001). The addition of a third genomic sequence, that of uropathogenic ExPEC strain CFT073, revealed that only about 10% of CFT073-associated genes were represented in the O157:H7 EDL933 genome. A comparison of these strains with K-12 MG1655 demonstrated that only 39.2% of the combined gene set was represented across the three compared genomes (Welch et al. 2002). These early genomic analyses provided additional support for the mosaic structure of the E. coli genome, consisting of a shared core genome interspersed with “islands” specific to different strains obtained through horizontal gene transfer.
The core and pan-genomic structures of E. coli As additional E. coli genome sequences continued to accumulate, the existence of a “core” and “pan” genome became increasingly apparent. The core genome consists of the genes and gene families conserved among all E. coli strains, whereas the collection of all genes found across all E. coli strains sampled is referred to as the pan-genome (Hendrickson 2009; Tenaillon et al. 2010). Early comparative genomic studies of relatively few isolates revealed the underlying core and pan-genomic structure of E. coli. For example, a comparison of the genomes of 20 different E. coli strains revealed that, on average, the E. coli genome contains 4721 genes, with only ∼2000 of these genes conserved across all strains, while the pan-genome consists of 17838 genes (Touchon et al. 2009). In another study comparing 53 sequenced E. coli genomes, Lukjancenko et al. (2010) demonstrated that the core genome consisted of 1472 conserved gene families, with the pan-genome comprising 13296 gene families in total. As such, early comparative genomic analyses suggested that a given E. coli genome will only have roughly 20% of its genes conserved as part of the core genome, with the remaining 80% representing the variable pan-genome across all other E. coli. The E. coli core genome, therefore, typically comprises only a fifth of all genes in a given E. coli genome.
As additional studies continued to compare the genomes of an increasing number of E. coli isolates, a clear trend emerged. As the number of genomes compared grew, the number of genes in the core genome decreased, while the number of genes in the pan-genome increased. The genome of a single E. coli strain, therefore, can be thought to consist of a core genome that is shared between all E. coli strains, supplemented by an “accessory” genome that may include subsets of genes that are only specific to select strains. Analyses of E. coli core and accessory genes suggest that the core and pan-genomes play distinct roles in E. coli evolution. The conserved core genes are thought to encode for core metabolic processes and essential housekeeping functions in all E. coli strains (Rasko et al. 2008), explaining the development of the early classification schemes for Enterobacteriaciae based on biochemical phenotyping. In contrast, the components of the pan-genome are believed to serve a broad set of functions and new capabilities that afford the various strains of E. coli the ability to exploit and adapt to a wide range of niches (Lukjancenko et al. 2010). As such, the ever-growing pan-genome affords E. coli a high level of plasticity, resulting in a large diversity of adaptive paths leading to the radial evolution of E. coli into diverse host and non-host environments. The fact that only 20% of the genome is conserved amongst E. coli strains, and that various strains (i.e., ecotypes) can acquire adaptive genes from the pan-genome to exploit a variety of niches, raises questions about the status of E. coli as a single species. Indeed, similar to the Pseudomonas syringae complex and Burkholderia cepacia complex, E. coli is characterized by a vast, open pan-genome that continually grows as new strains are discovered (Rasko et al. 2008). Furthermore, based on estimates of the proportion that core genes comprise in a single genome, E. coli (20%) is comparable to the B. cepacia complex (15.33% to 25.20%), and is more variable than the P. syringae complex (37.69% to 50.70%, when using “soft” core genes that are present in at least 95% of strains) in terms of variability in gene content and genome composition (Dillon et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020). Given this, and coupled with the extensive horizontal gene transfer that occurs between strains, E. coli may be more appropriately designated as a complex instead of a single species (Georgiades and Raoult 2011).
The existence of an E. coli core genome raises the possibility of its use for whole genome phylogenetic analysis (phylogenomics). As the core genome comprises conserved genes across (theoretically) all E. coli genomes, using it to assess phylogeny circumvents the issue of schema choice, which otherwise led to inconsistencies in phylogenies derived from MLST. Importantly, however, the validity of phylogenomics depends on the extent to which the core genome is disrupted by homologous recombination (Chaudhuri and Henderson 2012). In an early genome-wide study comparing the genome sequences of six E. coli strains and a strain of Shigella flexneri, Mau et al. (2006) estimated the intraspecific recombination rate in E. coli. In contrast to larger horizontal transfer events that lead to gene acquisition or loss, which are more easily detected, intraspecific recombination involves more subtle horizontal transfer events that result in the substitution of alleles within conserved regions of the E. coli genome. The comparison of E. coli and S. flexneri genomes suggested that this intraspecific recombination affects about 10% of the core genome, usually involving small clusters of substitutions in certain types of genes, typically those involved in motility and various cellular processes such as DNA replication, repair, recombination, and small molecule biosynthesis (Mau et al. 2006).
Through examining the observed pattern of non-random allelic associations at multiple loci (linkage disequilibrium), Touchon et al. (2009) suggested that the rate of recombination was more than twice as high as the mutation rate for short sequences of 50 bp. Given this, a single base has a 100-fold higher chance of being involved in recombination than mutation. This finding provided strong evidence for the important role of recombination in the evolution of the E. coli genome. While it was expected that this level of recombination would be incompatible with the phylogenetic relationships established previously through traditional phylogenetic methods (i.e., MLEE and MLST), simulation experiments demonstrated that the phylogenetic signal was robust and remained unaffected. Indeed, the construction of a whole-genome-based phylogeny clustered genomes into the same phylogenetic groups that were predicted earlier by MLEE and MLST studies (Chaudhuri and Henderson 2012).
Thus, while recombination does appear to occur at a greater rate than mutation, evidence suggests that the mode and scope of recombination is compatible with an apparent clonal population ancestry in E. coli. This allows for the construction of a phylogeny that appropriately reflects the relationships between different E. coli strains, especially as whole genome sequence-based methods, such as multilocus sequence analysis (MLSA), become the gold standard for phylogenetic analyses (Glaeser and Kämpfer 2015).
The correlation between E. coli phylogenetics and phenotype Despite its clonal population structure, and reflected in the whole genome-based phylogeny, there is extensive substructure within E. coli, allowing for the assignment of individual strains to one of several major phylogenetic groups (Fig. 1). Currently, E. coli strains can be classified according to 8 phylogroups; 7 of these (A, B1, B2, C, D, E, F) belong to E. coli sensu stricto, whereas the eighth is Escherichia cryptic clade I, consisting of strains of Escherichia that are genetically distinct but phenotypically indistinguishable from E. coli (Luo et al. 2011; Clermont et al. 2013). Although E. coli strains themselves are not assigned to cryptic clade I, the extensive recombination observed between clade I and other E. coli strains assigned to the major phylogenetic groups supports its inclusion as a (divergent) E. coli phylogroup (Walk et al. 2009). Recently, additional phylogroups, G and H, have also been identified from whole genome sequence analyses, appearing to have diverged earlier than the other, more recent phylogroups (Lu et al. 2016; Clermont et al. 2019). Moreover, a series of studies conducted by Zhi et al. have characterized a subpopulation of E. coli strains that appear to have evolved to specifically survive and persist in wastewater matrices (Zhi et al. 2016; Zhi et al. 2019). These wastewater-adapted strains were shown to cluster separately from enteric and other naturalized strains in phylogrouping analyses, suggesting that these wastewater E. coli strains may represent an additional separate E. coli phylogenetic clade (Zhi et al. 2019).
The diversification of E. coli strains into the different phylogroups appears to reflect the diversity in lifestyle patterns exhibited by the species. The different phylogroups, for example, appear to differ with regards to the patterns of pathogenesis they are associated with. Of the main phylogroups, including A, B1, B2, and D, E. coli strains belonging to phylogroups B2 and D are more likely to cause extra-intestinal infection and possess the corresponding virulence genes than groups A and B1 (Picard et al. 1999; Johnson and Stell 2000). Furthermore, comparing the extra-intestinal-associated phylogroups B2 and D, phylogroup B2 was positively associated with the UPEC pathotype, whereas phylogroup D was positively associated with the other ExPEC pathotypes and negatively associated with the UPEC pathotype (Hutton et al. 2018). Moreover, the more severe enteric pathotypes, including EHEC, ETEC, and EIEC, were restricted to phylogroups A, B1, and E, whereas milder enteric pathotypes, including EAEC and DAEC, were dispersed across all phylogroups (Escobar-Páramo et al. 2004). This suggests that while all E. coli strains possess the capacity to express virulence factors associated with milder intestinal manifestations, the genetic background of strains in phylogroups A, B1, and E are necessary for the expression of virulence factors related to the more severe enteric pathologies.
The different phylogroups also appear to vary in their capacity for antibiotic resistance. For instance, strains in phylogroup A (Mammeri et al. 2009) and phylogroup D (Deschamps et al. 2009) in particular tend to develop resistance to third-generation cephalosporins, via a SNP in the ampC -lactamase gene and the acquisition of CTX-M plasmids (containing a group of class A ESBLs), respectively. In contrast, B2 strains are less resistant to antibiotics, regardless of the molecular mechanism involved in the acquisition of resistance (Ochman and Selander 1984a; Johnson et al. 1994). Within the recently identified phylogroup G, which is a poultry-associated E. coli lineage that can cause extra-intestinal disease in humans, the main sequence type complex, strain STc117, has also been shown to exhibit multidrug resistance via the production of CTX-M extended-spectrum β-lactamases (Clermont et al. 2019).
The subdivision of E. coli into separate phylogenetic groups reflects the high plasticity of the genome, suggesting a large diversity in the adaptive paths throughout E. coli evolution. The concept of the pan-genome suggests that certain groups of genes or genomic islands will only be found in a subset of strains, and select combinations of these genetic elements will favour the survival and adaptation of these strains in specific environments including the host gastrointestinal tract. Reflecting this, E. coli has been isolated from a variety of host animal species, including humans, domestic and wild mammals, birds, and reptiles. Presumably, each host species will have a distinct gastrointestinal environment that an E. coli strain must adapt to such that it can competitively establish a niche amongst the competing gut microbiome. Considering the myriad of selective pressures exerted by a host gastrointestinal environment, including pH, temperature, and the competing microbiome, different strains of E. coli will likely evolve to adapt to distinct gut environments (i.e., toward host-specificity). Thus, if E. coli can be clustered according to specific patterns of genotypic and phenotypic characteristics (i.e., capacity for antibiotic resistance and patterns of pathogenesis), there may also be a range in the hosts that certain E. coli strains (i.e., ecotypes) can associate with. In other words, these natural selection forces may drive E. coli towards host (or niche)-specialization. Indeed, several studies have demonstrated that certain strains of E. coli appear to be host-specific (Clermont et al. 2008; Carlos et al. 2010).
Host and environmental niche specialization in E. coli Specialization and generalization as strategies for microbe–host association
Host-specificity is defined as the restriction to colonizing one, or a defined group, of hosts (Kirzinger and Stavrinides 2012). In host–microbe interactions, generalists are characterized by a (comparatively) wide host range, capable of interacting with and colonizing multiple host species. In contrast, specialists are characterized by a restricted host range, in which they can establish an intimate relationship with only a single host species (Pfennig 2001; Bäumler and Fang 2013; Leggett et al. 2013).
Generalization and specialization represent two opposing strategies a microbial species may utilize to maximize their evolutionary success. As different host species effectively represent different environmental niches, the fitness of a microbe can vary across host-species. Microbes can deal with this problem of differential fitness in one of two ways. Generalists will express alternative survival and colonization strategies as needed, depending on the current host species, maximizing their evolutionary success by colonizing as many host species as possible. In contrast, specialists evolve highly refined survival strategies to adapt to a specific host’s gastrointestinal environment, thus maximizing their exploitation efficiency of limited resources and replication potential over less-adapted conspecific strains within their host gastrointestinal system (Pfennig 2001; Bäumler and Fang 2013). Although both host-generalization and host-specialization can enhance a microbial species’ evolutionary success, each strategy has trade-offs with associated fitness costs. Generalists, for instance, can interact with a wider range of hosts, but will be less capable of efficiently exploiting any one of their given hosts compared with specialists, whereas specialists will be better adapted to their particular host species, but will be less likely to modify their phenotypic expression in changing host environmental contexts, such that their fate becomes inextricably linked with their host (Brown et al. 2012; Leggett et al. 2013).
Classically, it has been argued that the evolutionary advantages of host-specialization are outweighed by the advantages of host-generalization in practice (Woolhouse et al. 2001). This is suggested by the wide prevalence of pathogens capable of infecting and transmitting between multiple host species. Of the described human pathogen species, for instance, 60% are zoonotic, whereas 80% of pathogens in domestic animals adopt multihost lifestyles (Cleaveland et al. 2001; Taylor et al. 2001). Despite this, many zoonotic pathogens have been shown to genetically substructure into specialists. For instance, while E. coli O157 is commonly considered a zoonotic pathogen, isolates cluster into two genetic lineages: strains that only colonize animals (i.e., cattle-specialists), and strains that can colonize both cattle and humans as generalists (Kim et al. 1999; Yang et al. 2004: Eppinger et al. 2011). As such, arguments have shifted to suggest that evolution instead favors host-specialization, either due to the functional tradeoffs that limit the fitness of generalists in any one of their potential niches (i.e., antagonistic pleiotropy) or because host-specialization is more readily maintained, owing to the strong diversifying selection pressures across contrasting host gastrointestinal environments that lead to the rapid evolution of specialists compared with generalists (Whitlock 1996; Woolhouse et al. 2001; Kassen 2002). Indeed, although it is conventionally considered to be a host-generalist, E. coli exhibits a high degree of host specificity.
Escherichia coli phylogroups reflect host association The prevalence of host-specificity in the E. coli species is reflected in the characteristic distribution of E. coli phylogenetic groups across various host species. In a survey of E. coli strains isolated from various Australian vertebrates, Gordon and Cowling (2003) demonstrated that E. coli strains belonging to phylogroups A and B1 were recovered from any vertebrate, and thus potentially represented generalist strains of E. coli, whereas isolates belonging to phylogroups B2 and D were largely restricted to endothermic vertebrates and thus were potential specialists. The distribution of E. coli phylogenetic groups also differs depending on the particular host species. For humans, the main phylogroups represented are group A (40.5%) and group B2 (25.5%), whereas groups B1 (41%) and group A (22%) are predominant in other animals. The distribution of phylogenetic groups also appears to differ depending on the particular animal host, as B2 is the predominant phylogenetic group in herbivorous and omnivorous mammals, whereas group B1 is the most prevalent in carnivorous mammals and birds (Gordon and Cowling 2003). Certain phylogenetic groups also contain E. coli strains that are restricted to particular host species. For instance, haemolysin-producing B1 strains, exhibiting distinct O-antigen types and MLST profiles, have been found exclusively in animals other than humans (Escobar-Páramo et al. 2006), whereas human-specific E. coli strains have also been reported, including an avirulent clone in phylogroup B2 subgroup VIII (B28), and a clone in phylogroup B2 subgroup III (B23) (Carlos et al. 2010; Clermont et al. 2008).
Genetic markers of E. coli host-specificity On the smallest scale, the host-specificity of E. coli may be influenced by distinct SNPs in key genes. For instance, in an analysis of E. coli O157:H7 isolates obtained from bovine and human hosts, Franz et al. (2012) identified an informative single SNP that discriminated the human clinical isolates. The SNP of interest was found in the tir gene, which encodes for the translocated intimin receptor, a bacterial protein that mediates the adhesion of E. coli O157:H7 to mammalian cells. In particular, the distribution of two alleles, tir(255 A) and tir(255 T), among isolates was closely associated with the host from which they were obtained. Within the bovine isolates, tir(255 A) and tir(255 T) were approximately equally distributed (54.8% and 45.2%, respectively), in contrast, the tir(255 T) allele was over-represented among the human clinical isolates (92.9%). Thus, the tir(A255T) polymorphism appeared to be a strong differentiating genetic feature for human E. coli O157:H7 isolates (Franz et al. 2012).
While individual SNPs are predictive of host-specificity in E. coli, collections of SNPs across the genome appear to better reflect the host-specific lifestyles of E. coli strains. For instance, using a highly discriminatory SNP approach, Sheludchenko et al. (2010) identified host-informative SNP sets in an analysis of 782 strains of E. coli isolated from various host sources. Through examining the sequences of housekeeping genes, a set of 8 highly discriminatory SNPs were identified amongst E. coli isolates obtained from various animal hosts including cattle, dogs, kangaroos, pigs, rabbits, and horses, as well as clinical isolates obtained from humans. Of the 782 isolates examined, 74 distinct SNP profiles were obtained, of which 8 SNP profiles were determined to be host-specific. Of the 8 host-specific SNP profiles, 7 were unique to human isolates, whereas one was unique to animal isolates (Sheludchenko et al. 2010). Adopting a more novel approach, Zhi et al. (2015, 2016) utilized a logic-regression-based analysis to identify highly specific host-informative SNP-biomarker patterns for E. coli isolated from humans, cattle, deer, and pigs, within select intergenic regions across the genome (csgBAC–csgDEFG, uspC–flhDC, asnS–ompF region, and ydeR–yedS). Identifying the most host-informative intergenic regions across the E. coli genome discriminated between isolates from humans and cattle. Indeed, while host-informative SNP-biomarker patterns were identified within several ITGRs, different ITGRs appear to be more host-informative than others, depending on the host-species of interest. Indeed, across the 80 ITGRs surveyed, informative ITGRs for human strains were predominantly flanked by genes involved in antibiotic resistance, whereas the most informative ITGRs for bovine isolates were flanked by genes involved in environmental resistance and stress responses (Zhi et al. 2016).
The host-specificity exhibited by E. coli may also be influenced at the gene level. In the same study that identified the discriminating tir(A255T) polymorphism for bovine and human O157:H7 isolates, Franz et al. (2012) also identified gene variants that distinguished isolates from bovine and human hosts. In particular, variants in the Q gene (q21 and Q933) and stx2 gene (stx2a and stx2c) were found to be highly associated with the host of origin. Bovine isolates were found to primarily harbor the stx2c gene variant (86.4%), whereas the distribution of the stx2a and stx2c were less skewed in human clinical isolates, with 36.5% possessing the stx2c variant, 22.4% possessing the stx2a variant, and 22.4% possessing both variants. Furthermore, the distribution of the Q gene variants correlated with the distribution of the stx2 subtypes, with the presence of q21 strongly correlating with stx2c and Q933 strongly correlating with stx2a. Thus, bovine isolates were similarly found to be dominated by the q21 variant alone, whereas human isolates were typically characterized by the Q933 variant, either alone or in conjunction with the q21 variant (Franz et al. 2012).
A variety of other gene targets have been suggested to mediate host-specificity in E. coli; this is especially apparent in the host-specificity of certain E. coli pathotypes. The host-specificity of ETEC, for instance, is thought to be due to the presence/absence of particular host-specific colonization factors that can interact with the characteristic receptors expressed by each potential host species. Reflecting this, different host-associated ETEC strains are characterized by distinct assemblages of fimbrial adhesins and enterotoxin variants. Concerning fimbriae, pig-specific ETEC strains are characterized by F4, F6, and F18 fimbriae, whereas cattle-specific ETEC strains possess F17 fimbriae (Dubreuil et al. 2016). Similarly, different host-associated ETEC strains are characterized by distinct enterotoxin variants, e.g., human-specific ETEC strains are characterized by the LTIh variant of the heat-labile enterotoxin (LT) and STh variant of heat-stable enterotoxin A (STa), whereas pig-specific ETEC strains are characterized by variants of heat-stable enterotoxin B (STb) (Wang et al. 2019). The host-specificity of ExPEC strains similarly appears to be mediated in part by the presence of key genes. Several adhesins of ExPEC strains, for instance, have been determined to be highly host-specific, including the AC/I pili of O78 APEC strains and the K99 fimbriae of strains that appear to only cause septicemia in lambs (Ron 2006). Similarly, using a transposon insertion sequencing (TraDIS) approach to evaluate the importance of various genes for the pathogenesis of the potentially zoonotic ExPEC XM strain, distinct assemblages of genes were identified to be required for virulence in mammalian and avian models (Zhang et al. 2019). Indeed, while 151 genes were essential for virulence in both models and can thus be thought of as “general” virulence genes, 97 and 280 genes were specifically required for virulence in the mammalian and avian model, respectively. This suggests that, in addition to the genes required for virulence in general, host-restricted ExPEC strains also exclusively harbor genes that are specifically required for virulence in their particular host species.
The strong correlation between particular gene targets and host origin have led to their use as genetic markers for source tracking. Indeed, some gene targets that have been implemented for source tracking have been found to be specific for strains derived from a particular host species. For instance, swine-derived E. coli isolates are characterized by a region of the STII variant of the ETEC heat-stable enterotoxin gene not found in strains isolated from other host-species (Khatib et al. 2003). Similarly, in a comparative genome analysis of 22 E. coli isolates, Gomi et al. (2014) identified several genomic regions from the accessory genome that were host-informative for humans, cows, pigs, and chickens, of which 2 cow- and 3 pig-specific gene markers were identified with no cross-reactivity with strains derived from the other host species examined.
Host-specificity of E. coli pathotypes The host-specific lifestyles of various pathogenic strains of E. coli provide further evidence of E. coli host-specialization. For instance, EHEC/STEC isolates from bovine and human hosts appear to be genetically and ecotypically distinct. A comparison of bovine and human clinical E. coli O157:H7 isolates by Kim et al. (1999) revealed two sets of subpopulations that clustered nonrandomly into two lineages. Bovine isolates from geographically distinct locations across the United States were shown to constitute the majority of strains in lineage II, which was devoid of human isolates. In contrast, human clinical isolates were largely represented in lineage I, along with certain virulent bovine isolates that could presumably transmit to humans. The two distinct lineages represent two potential subgroups of E. coli O157:H7: the bovine-specific lineage II, which is not readily capable of transmitting to and causing disease in humans, and lineage I, which consists of strains that are transmissible between cattle and humans as cattle–human generalists (Kim et al. 1999; Yang et al. 2004; Eppinger et al. 2011).
The population genetics of EPEC also provides evidence of host-specialization in E. coli. For instance, after genetically characterizing 159 atypical EPEC (aEPEC) strains lacking the E. coli adherence factor (EAF) plasmid, Wang et al. (2013) demonstrated that aEPEC strains from bovine, swine, and human isolates were disproportionately represented in different phylogenetic groups. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that bovine aEPEC isolates (79%) predominantly clustered in phylogenetic group B1, swine aEPEC isolates (54%) predominantly clustered in group A, and isolates obtained from healthy humans (54%) mainly clustered in group B2. Furthermore, the pathogenesis of EPEC appears to be highly host-species specific. Localized adherence assays performed by Tobe and Sasakawa (2002) using the human pathogenic EPEC strain B171-8 on epithelial cells from mouse intestine (CMT-93 and Colon-26 cell lines), and human-intestine-derived cells (Caco-2, T-84, and Intestine-407 cell lines), revealed that the human EPEC strain adhered to these cell types with differing efficiencies. The efficiency of B171-8 adherence to, and subsequent infection in, the mouse-derived cell types was significantly lower (less than 5%) than in the human-derived intestinal epithelial cells, where >49% of the human-derived cell lines were infected. The specific binding properties of the human-associated B171-8 was also shown to be biologically relevant for its in-vivo behavior in non-human hosts, as this strain could not establish an infection in mice, even when introduced into germ-free mice (Tobe and Sasakawa 2002).
Another important E. coli pathotype, ETEC, is known to exhibit a high degree of host-specificity. ETEC is an important enteric pathogen commonly associated with traveler’s diarrhea in humans (Kai et al. 2010), neonatal diarrheal diseases in newborn calves (Foster and Smith 2009), sheep and dogs (Dubreuil et al. 2016), and enteric colibacillosis (leading to neonatal and post-weaning diarrhea) in pigs (Luppi 2017). Despite its prevalence in many host-species, ETEC infections are reportedly extremely rare or non-existent in a variety of other animals, such as poultry, rabbits, and horses (Dubreuil et al. 2016). This restriction in host-range for ETEC in some animals and not others is puzzling, since non-permissive hosts express the appropriate ETEC fimbrial and enterotoxin receptors conducive for ETEC colonization (and subsequent pathogenesis). The high degree of host-specificity of ETEC is also suggested in the lack of suitable animal models of ETEC infection. For instance, while both mouse and rabbit models have been used to study ETEC infection, neither are naturally susceptible to ETEC, leading to limited standalone infection models that either resist colonization after ETEC inoculation (Allen et al. 2006), or fail to exhibit diarrheal symptoms in response to produced enterotoxins (Wenzel et al. 2017). For instance, the oral introduction of a human diarrheagenic strain of ETEC into a mouse model by Allen et al. (2006) produced very low levels of colonization without diarrheal manifestations typical of ETEC infection, suggesting that human-adapted ETEC strains lack the ability to sufficiently adhere to, and colonize, the mouse intestinal epithelium. This specificity is also observed between typical ETEC hosts, as pig models are not effectively colonized by human-adapted strains of ETEC (Wenzel et al. 2017). Interestingly, while ETEC exhibits a high degree of host-specificity in line with other enteric pathotypes, this specificity does not appear to be linked to the evolution of distinct host-specific ETEC lineages. Rather, the high degree of ETEC host-specificity seems to be mediated by the acquisition of host-specific colonization factors that can be horizontally transferred, and then expressed, in the genetic background of various strains. Reflecting this, MLST-based phylogenetic analyses of human-, bovine-, and porcine-derived ETEC strains demonstrated that the represented E. coli sequence types contained both human- and animal-associated strains (Turner et al. 2006; Steinsland et al. 2010), and an extensive polyphyletic structure with human and animal ETEC strains distributed across the different phylogroups (Turner et al. 2006; Clermont et al. 2011b).
Similar to the host-specificity exhibited by the enteric pathotypes, extraintestinal strains also display extensive host-specificity despite their genetic similarity. Genetic and phylogenetic studies have demonstrated the close similarity between avian pathogenic E. coli (APEC) and human ExPEC strains. For instance, early genomic comparisons of a variety of E. coli serogroup O78 isolates obtained from various host-species revealed that human septicemic O78 strains clustered into the same clonal grouping that was assigned to E. coli derived from poultry (Chérifi et al. 1994). Furthermore, APEC and ExPEC strains have been shown to share a common repertoire of virulence genes, such as for iron acquisition systems, P and S fimbriae, and a K1 capsule (Mokady et al. 2005; Rodriguez-Siek et al. 2005). Reflecting this genetic similarity, APEC and human ExPEC strains display considerable overlap in the predominant serogroups represented, and phylogenetically subcluster into the same phylogroups, including B2 (subgroup 1), B1, and D (Moulin-Schouleur et al. 2007). The close similarity of human and avian ExPEC strains has led to the suggestion that they have zoonotic potential. Despite the close similarity between APEC and human ExPEC strains, there does appear to be some degree of host-specificity between these extraintestinal strains. Indeed, APEC strains isolated from cases of avian septicemia appear to be more virulent in chicks than strains isolated from cases of newborn meningitis and are also more virulent in birds than in mice (Ron 2006). Similarly, although Zhang et al. (2019) identified a potential zoonotic ExPEC strain in ExPEC XM, as it displayed virulence in both mammalian and avian models, other ExPEC strains examined displayed some level of host-specificity. Indeed, upon inoculation into mammalian and an avian models, the human ExPEC strain RS218 was significantly more virulent in the mammalian model while APEC DE471 was more virulent in the avian model.
Escherichia coli niche- and host-specificity: linking genotype, phenotype, and ecotype A number of studies have demonstrated a recapitulation of genotypic, phenotypic, and ecotypic associations in E. coli. A series of studies conducted by Zhi et al. (2015, 2016, 2017, 2019) shed light on how genotype, phenotype, and ecotype relate to the biology of the organism. Using a supervised logic-regression-based approach to analyze the SNP variation in various E. coli intergenic regions, the researchers identified novel strains of E. coli that appeared to be highly adapted to wastewater/sewage environments as their primary niche. Indeed, these wastewater-specific E. coli were found to be genetically, phenotypically, and ecotypically distinct from enteric and cryptic E. coli strains (Zhi et al. 2017, 2019; Wang et al. 2020).
Genetically speaking, naturalized wastewater-specific E. coli carry distinct SNP ITGR biomarkers (as identified through logic regression analysis) not found in enteric strains and the cryptic clades (Zhi et al. 2016, 2019). Interestingly, a proportion of these wastewater strains were also found to harbor a unique insertion element, IS30, located specifically within the uspC-flhDC ITGR locus, that was absent from enteric and cryptic strains. Confirming the distinct genetic nature of the wastewater strains, phylogenomic analyses clustered the wastewater strains (i.e., those that carried the unique SNP biomarker and the uspC-IS30-flhDC marker) into a separate cluster, suggesting that these wastewater-specific strains may comprise a novel E. coli phylogroup that is distinct from the other conventional phylogroups. Subsequent phenotypic characterization revealed several remarkable adaptations in these strains, allowing them to survive the challenging conditions of a wastewater treatment plant. For example, wastewater strains were found to be 100 000 times more resistant to chlorine than enteric E. coli strains, and they also displayed enhanced resistance to oxidants (Wang et al. 2020). The strains were also shown to be highly adept at forming biofilms compared with human enteric strains (Zhi et al. 2017) and displayed an extreme heat-resistance phenotype mediated by a genomic island known as the locus of heat resistance (LHR) (Wang et al. 2020). Wang et al. (2020) demonstrated that the LHR was important for mediating the cross-resistance associated with chlorine, advanced oxidants, and heat. LHR has subsequently been shown to encode for genes associated with DNA repair, chaperones, and heat shock (Mercer et al. 2015; Mercer et al. 2017). The genomes of these naturalized wastewater strains were further characterized by an overabundance of stress-resistance genes compared with their enteric counterparts, likely intended to enhance their survival against wastewater treatment processes intended to kill these microbes [i.e., chlorination, UV irradiation, oxygenation, high temperatures (biosolids composting), microbial competition, predation, etc.], and seemingly acquired through horizontal gene transfer (Zhi et al. 2019).
Importantly, across the thousands of independent E. coli genomes that have been sequenced to date, only strains isolated from wastewater/sewage plants in Canada, the US, and Switzerland clustered together in this novel phylogroup, suggesting that these naturalized ecotypes are disseminated in wastewater treatment plants around the world. Reflecting this, comparative genomics revealed that naturalized wastewater E. coli isolated from 10 different wastewater treatment plants in Canada were 96% similar to each other at the whole genome level, whereas there was only ∼82% similarity to enteric strains, and ∼62% genome similarity to cryptic E. coli strains (Zhi et al. 2019). Indeed, the collective genetic and phenotypic evidence point towards a distinct E. coli ecotype that has abandoned the host gastrointestinal tract and instead evolved to specifically inhabit sewage and treated wastewater matrices as its primary niche (Fig. 2).
Conclusions The prospect that there exists a wide array of distinct E. coli ecotypes that each occupy distinct ecological niches (i.e., through colonizing different host-species) has important implications in our current understanding of the species. This is especially important when taking a polyphasic taxonomic approach, which incorporates multiple perspectives, including genotypic, phenotypic, and ecotypic considerations, to obtain a more holistic conception of prokaryotic diversity (Kämpfer and Glaeser 2012; Kämpfer 2014) (Fig. 2). Currently, the designation of E. coli as a single species is largely supported by biochemical and phylogenetic evidence; however, provided the wide genetic and biological diversity and extensive host-specificity exhibited by this bacterium, and coupled with the fact that only 20% of the genome is core to E. coli, we argue the importance of incorporating the concept of the “ecotype” for taxonomic considerations.
Evidence of the host-specific E. coli ecotype warrants the inclusion of ecotypic considerations in current taxonomic schemes, especially when considering the recent prioritization of DNA-based criteria for bacterial taxonomy. The rapid growth of genomic-based methods has provided a breadth of genotypic information as a driving force for bacterial classification; however, this comes at the expense of the importance of phenotype and (as we argue) ecotype, especially since genotypic information is only made biologically and evolutionarily relevant through its expression in the phenotype and ecotype (Kämpfer 2014). Indeed, while many species complexes are defined according to genetic metrics (Van Ingen et al. 2018), these definitions fail to incorporate any phenotypic or ecotypic information, and thus present a limited and arbitrary perspective on what constitutes a complex. Reflecting this, the emphasis of genetic-based criteria for bacteria taxonomy has been criticized for being too restrictive, and it fails to consider the underlying processes of speciation in bacterial taxonomy (Georgiades and Raoult 2011). We argue that taking a polyphasic approach, namely taking into account ecotype, helps address these issues.
As exhibited by the growing evidence of E. coli host- and niche-specificity, this bacterium essentially consists of a wide array of host- and niche-specific ecotypes. As these specialized ecotypes evolve to become adapted to their specific host or niche, each ecotype becomes genetically distinct and more restricted to their preferred environment. The genetic discrepancy between ecotypes and the decreased likelihood of distinct ecotypes co-existing in the same environment effectively reduces the level of genetic trafficking that can occur. This results in the existence of several isolated host- and niche-specific E. coli ecotypes that retain genetic coherence (Dillon et al. 2019) due to the E. coli generalists, which can still transit across multiple environments and mediate a residual level of genetic exchange between the specialized ecotypes that inhabit them. Escherichia coli, therefore, consists of a collection of host- and niche-specific ecotypes that all collectively fall under an E. coli “complex”.
Provided the extensive host- and niche-specificity present within E. coli, we argue that such ecotypic information provides valuable insight for taxonomic considerations, as is the case in parasite classification (Šlapeta 2013). Ecotypic information becomes especially important considering that, currently, there is no defined criteria for what constitutes a complex in prokaryotic taxonomy. Generally speaking, a complex is defined as groups of closely related organisms that are difficult or impossible to distinguish phenotypically, where recombination is sufficiently high to blur taxonomic boundaries (Dillon et al. 2019). Currently, genetic metrics form the foundation for defining species complexes; however, phenotypic and ecotypic evidence can provide supplementary criteria to obtain a more holistic understanding of what constitutes a complex. Reflecting this, the Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato complex (Rudenko et al. 2011) incorporates ecotypic information, including vector and host range, when distinguishing the subgroups that comprise the complex. We argue that taking a similar polyphasic approach will provide a more holistic view of the biology and taxonomic status of E. coli.
Indeed, E. coli is characterized by a remarkable level of genotypic, phenotypic, and ecotypic diversity comparable to that observed in other bacterial species complexes. In terms of genomic and genotypic diversity, E. coli possesses a large, open pan-genome — a characteristic observed in other species complexes (Dillon et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020). Furthermore, E. coli also exhibits a remarkable level of interstrain variability in gene content, which is suggested by estimates of the core genome constituting only 20% of the genetic background of a single strain. Interestingly, this is comparable to estimates for the P. syringae complex (37.69%–50.70%) (Dillon et al. 2019) and B. cepacia complex (15.33%–25.20%) (Zhou et al. 2020). Beyond its genomic and genotypic diversity, E. coli is also characterized by a vast ecotypic diversity, as it is composed of a wide array of host- and niche-specific ecotypes, which is comparable to the level of diversity in host-specificity and host-range observed in the B. burgdorferi sensu lato complex (Rudenko et al. 2011).
As such, the great genotypic and genomic variability, diversity in lifestyles, and existence of distinct host- and niche-specific E. coli ecotypes, coupled with the extensive horizontal gene transfer that can occur between strains, calls into question the convention of describing E. coli simply as a species (Georgiades and Raoult 2011). The incorporation of ecotypic considerations (i.e., host- an niche-specificity) alongside the great genetic and phenotypic variability argue that E. coli may be more appropriately described as a complex composed of several distinct host-specific ecotypes that may share a similar phenotypic and ecological potential, but are capable of exploiting slightly different ecological niches (Konstantinidis et al. 2006) (Fig. 1). We argue that this perspective more accurately reflects the radiative expansion and evolution of E. coli into distinct host-species and niches and provides a more holistic perspective into taxonomy of the model bacterium.