https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2021.145707
Title: Comparative phylo-pangenomics reveals generalist lifestyles in representative Acinetobacter species and proposes candidate gene markers for species identification
Abstract: Acinetobacter species have the potential to invade and colonize immunocompromised patients, therefore being well-known as opportunistic pathogens. Among these bacteria, the species of the
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus-Acinetobacter baumannii “complex” (Acb members) emerge as the main often isolated bacteria in clinical specimens. The unequivocal taxonomy is crucial to correctly identify these species and associated with comparative genomic analyses aids to understand their life-styles as well. In this study, all publicly available
Acinetobacter species at the date of this study preparation were analyzed. The results revealed that the Acb members are in fact a complex when phenotypic methods are confronted, while for comparative and phylogenomics analyses this term is misleading, since they composed a monophyletic group instead. Nine best gene markers (response regulator,
recJ , recG , phosphomannomutase , pepSY , monovalent cation/H + antiporter subunit D, mnmE, glnE , and
bamA ) were selected for identification of Acinetobacter species. Moreover, representative strains of each species were split according their isolation sources in the categories: environmental, human, insect and non-human vertebrate. Neither niche-specific genome signature nor niche-associated functional and pathogenic potential were associated with their isolation source, meaning it is not the main force acting on
Acinetobacter adaptation in a given niche and corroborating that their ubiquitous distribution is a reflex of their generalist life-styles.
Introduction The taxonomy of Acinetobacter spp. is dynamic and changes as the newest genospecies are fully sequenced. The genus Acinetobacter is organized in the following taxonomic levels: Domain: Bacteria; Phylum: Proteobacteria; Class: Gamma Proteobacteria; Order: Pseudomonadales; Family: Moraxellaceae; and Genus Acinetobacter ( Almasaudi, 2018 ). Currently, 78 species were described ( https://lpsn.dsmz.de/search?word=acinetobacter ) and out of these, only 63 species were validly published according to the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN) ( Parte, 2014, 2018 ).
The proper taxonomic assignment is valuable for clinical microbiology since it allows epidemiological tracking and accurate diagnosis ( De Almeida, 2019 ). Besides, due to the clinical importance of Acinetobacter spp. and to dynamic multidrug resistance events given their ability to acquire antimicrobial determinants carried by plasmids, transposons and integrons ( Clark et al., 2016 ), huge efforts have been made to clarify the phylogenetic relationships inside this genus, especially for members of the Acinetobacter calcoaceticus – Acinetobacter baumannii “complex” (Acb), which are commonly reported causing infections in immunocompromised patients ( Peleg et al., 2008 ).
The term “Acb complex” was coined since the species belonging to it exhibit undistinguishable phenotypic characteristics and high genetic relatedness, being the accurate taxonomic assignment dependent on molecular methods ( Villalón et al., 2019 ). Initially, the “complex” was composed of A. calcoaceticus, A. baumannii and two non-classified strains formerly recognized as Acinetobacter genomic species 3 and Acinetobacter genomic species 13TU ( Gerner-Smidt et al., 1991 ), which were further formally reclassified as Acinetobacter pitti and Acinetobacter nosocomialis , respectively ( Nemec et al., 2011 ). Recently studies suggest Acinetobacter seifertii ( Nemec et al., 2015 ); Acinetobacter lactucae ( Cosgaya et al., 2016; Nemec et al., 2019 ), a basonym of Acinetobacter dijkshoorniae ( Dunlap and Rooney, 2018 ), and Acinetobacter oleivorans as integral members of this complex ( Rooney et al., 2016 ).
Despite Acb species presenting clinical importance, several Acinetobacter species, including pathogenic and non-pathogenic, were reported in a myriad of environments, varying from environmental samples up to human and animal hosts ( Adewoyin and Okoh, 2018 ). Due to their ubiquitous distribution, different strains can occupy many diverse ecological niches ( Al Atrouni et al., 2016 ). Niche-specific adaptations cause genomic modifications and can be seen as discrete genomic signatures, such as G + C content and genome size variations, presence/absence of virulence factors genes (VFs), antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) and differential metabolic potential. Generally, pathogenic bacteria tend to have more VFs and ARGs than non-pathogenic ones ( Załuga et al., 2014 ), and are sometimes prone to genome reduction through gene loss events when during the evolution course the strain goes into a new niche specialization, resulting in a host-adapted (i.e., human or animal) genotype ( Petrovska et al., 2017 ).
Furthermore, considering the importance of Acinetobacter species to the public health, phylogenomics associated with the study of ecological variants of the species inside this genus allows to increase the comprehension of bacterial diversification in several environments and sheds light on shared genetic elements that allow bacterial transition in their lifestyles from free-living to pathogenic organisms ( Chaudhry and Patil, 2020 ). In this scenario, we aimed to perform phylogenomic analysis to reconstruct the phylogenetic history of all publicly available Acinetobacter species with validated taxonomy, evaluated the presence of niche-specific genomic signatures in these strains through pangenomics analysis and also proposed new gene markers which may be helpful to distinguish among closely-related Acinetobacter species.
Material and methods Genomes selection criteria To choose one representative strain by each species, on June 04, 2020, all publicly available genomic data of each type strain belonging to the genus Acinetobacter was downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) using the script ncbi-genome-download (available at https://github.com/kblin/ncbi-genome-download ). However, at the time of this study delineation, some taxonomic-validated species ( https://lpsn.dsmz.de/search?word=acinetobacter ) did not present type strains deposited and to overcome this each non-type genome for each one of these non-type strains were downloaded on the same date ( Supporting information Table S1 ). Besides, to confirm the unambiguous species assignment among non-type strains, the average nucleotide identity (ANI) was calculated with pyani ( Pritchard et al., 2016 ). Further, to decide among the repeated genome assemblies to be used, the quality of each genome assembly was assessed using the Quast tool ( Gurevich et al., 2013 ) and the assemblies with the higher N90 values were chosen. Finally, to confirm the quality of the selected assemblies, the genome completeness was checked with BUSCO v.4. pipeline ( Simão et al., 2015 ) using the “ pseudomonadales_odb10”.
Core genes determination and phylogenetic reconstruction The phylogenetic reconstruction was performed twice: (i) with outgroups species ( Moraxella catarrhalis and Psychrobacter immobilis ) to evaluate the robustness of the phylogeny; and (ii) without the outgroup species to select genus-specific gene markers for taxonomic purposes. In the first reconstruction, 550 single-copy orthologous genes shared among Acinetobacter species and outgroups species were consensually determined by three independent clustering methods: Bidirectional Best-Hits (BDBH), Cluster of Orthologous Groups (COGtriangles) and Ortho Markov Cluster algorithm (OMCL)clustering methods implemented in the get_homologues pipeline ( Contreras-Moreira and Vinuesa, 2013 ), which was ran in default parameters. Next, by the use of the get_phylomarkers pipeline ( Vinuesa et al., 2018 ), the gene clusters were screened for recombinant signatures by the PhiPack algorithm and the best informative ones were evaluated by the Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) method to remove the influence of putative horizontally transferred genes, resulting in 275 high-quality protein-coding gene markers which were used to build a core genome maximum likelihood tree (cgML) based on the best-fit model LG + F + R4 following the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) standards, 10 independent iqtree runs ( Minh et al., 2020 ) and 1000 ultra-fast bootstraps ( Hoang et al., 2017 ).
The second reconstruction instead did not present any outgroup. The same approach as described above was performed to build a phylogenomic tree. The three independent clustering methods returned a consensual number of 815 single-copy orthologous genes shared by Acinetobacter species. A total of 624 high-quality gene markers were detected by the PhiPack algorithm and the KDE method, which were used to build a cgML phylogenomic tree based on the best-fit model GTR + F + R7 according to the BIC, 10 independent iqtree runs ( Minh et al., 2020 ) and 1000 ultra-fast bootstraps ( Hoang et al., 2017 ).
Selection of top gene markers and in silico validation From the consensual number of single-copy genes (n = 815) determined by the three independent clustering methods, the PhiPack and KDE methods, 109 potential gene markers from the 624 high-quality genes were returned and were ranked by phylogenetic signal measurements. The phylogenetic signal was first defined by ( Blomberg et al., 2003 ) as a “tendency for related species to resemble each other more than they resemble species drawn at random from the tree”, reflecting a statistical parameter of dependence among observations for species clustered in a phylogenetic tree ( Revell et al., 2008 ). Therefore, it measures whether the presence of trait values for two species is independent of their phylogenetic distance in the tree ( Keck et al., 2016 ).
From a practical perspective, the stronger it is, the more closely-related the species will be, while the smaller it is, it indicates greater evolutionary distances among closely-related species, perhaps facilitating their differentiation ( Kamilar and Cooper, 2013 ). In this context, the best 40 gene markers ranked according to the lowest phylogenetic signal were selected. Later, the core genes rpoB and gyrB were also added to the dataset since are commonly used for the Acb differentiation, and a global sequence alignment was performed for each one of the 42 genes clusters using the Clustal Omega ( Sievers et al., 2011 ) to measure the degree of similarity of these homologous genes. Then, the non-overlapping genes, those with at least 3% of dissimilarity, were picked as gene markers. The proposed nine gene markers were made publicly available at GitHub ( https://github.com/Otavio20/Acineto2020/tree/main/Reclassification_markers ).
Intending to validate the gene markers capacity and specificity to discriminate among closely-related species, the whole set of “Acinetobacter sp.” genomes (referred to as “unclassified genomes” in this study) available in the NCBI genome database were downloaded using the script ncbi-genomes-download. Next, the gene markers were concatenated in a single file and indexed as a custom blast database. The unclassified genomes were analyzed using the new database (parameters -outfmt -perc_identity 97) and only the sequences matching higher or equal to 97% of similarity were considered for reclassification. Finally, the newly classified genomes were then confronted with the representative genomes dataset in terms of ANI using the fastANI to an unambiguous taxonomic assignment ( Jain et al., 2018 ).
Pangenome analysis Pangenome was determined using the consensual set of genes shared by all Acinetobacter species found only by the COG and OMCL clustering methods. According to the get_homologues manual, for pangenome measurement, the algorithm BDBH is not suitable because it relies on a single reference genome, not considering genes absent in a given reference (i.e., or selected by the user or automatically selected by the pipeline considering the proteome with the least protein composition). Thus, pangenome matrices determined by the BDBH algorithm are potentially incomplete as BDBH is more appropriate for core genome estimation and was not designed to handle pangenomes measurements. Through the script “compare_clusters.pl”, a pangenome matrix was estimated to depict the number of core, soft-core, shell and cloud genes. Additionally, the pangenome matrix was inputted in the script “estimate_pangenome_phylogenies.sh” from the get_phylomarkers pipeline to build a pangenome maximum likelihood (ML) tree. The pangenome ML tree was built with the best-fit model GTR2 + FO + R3 according to the BIC, 10 independent iqtree runs ( Minh et al., 2020 ) and 1,000 Ultra-fast bootstraps ( Hoang et al., 2017 ).
Moreover, a functional characterization in terms of COG categories was performed for each strain using the eggNOG-mapper v.2 pipeline ( Huerta-Cepas et al., 2017 ) against the eggNOG v. 5.0 database ( Huerta-Cepas et al., 2019 ). Then, the functional annotation and the pangenome ML tree were visualized on iTOL v.5. ( Letunic and Bork, 2019 ) to infer patterns of isolation source vs. taxonomy vs. habitat-related functional repertoire. Additionally, metabolic pathways were predicted using the gapseq 1.0 pipeline ( Zimmermann et al., 2020 ) using the tBlastn parameter to find the genomic sequences against an in-built database composed of the databases MetaCyc Metabolic Pathway Database ( https://metacyc.org/ ) ( Caspi et al., 2020 ), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) ( https://www.genome.jp/kegg/ ) ( Kanehisa et al., 2016 ), ModelSEED ( https://modelseed.org/ ) ( Seaver et al., 2021 ) and a customized one implemented on the gapseq pipeline to annotate putative protein sequences.
Then, proteins complexes were predicted by text matching in the FASTA headers in order to detect protein subunits and reconstruct the pathways they work on. The program outputs tbl files which present the false and true positive pathways present in each genome. By the use of a custom shell-python script “gapseq_parser.sh” ( https://github.com/Otavio20/Acineto2020 ), the outputs were filtered to select only the true predicted pathways and all files were parsed in three main tables: one containing all metabolic pathways (pangenome’s pathways dataframe), one containing the metabolite pathways shared by all strains (core pathways dataframe) and another presenting the accessory pathways (the difference between the core pathways dataframe and intersection pathways one). A distance-based dendrogram was built comparing the differences between the core and accessory metabolic pathways using the dendextend ( Galili, 2015 ) R package.
Decoding of genomic signatures, ARGs and VFs associated with bacterial lifestyles To unravel the presence of genomic signatures related to habitat-niche specific adaptation in Acinetobacter spp. each bacterium was grouped into a category according to their isolation source: Environmental – for those isolated from soils and plants; Insect; Human; and Non-human vertebrate – for those isolated from any non-human vertebrate ( Supporting information Table S2 ). Afterward, the variation of genomic signatures was evaluated with basis on G + C content, genome size, the number of protein-coding genes (PCGs), usage biases of amino acids, stop codons, codons and k-mers frequencies using the QUAST report ( Gurevich et al., 2013 ) and the CompareM software toolkit (available in: https://github.com/dparks1134/CompareM ). The ABRicate pipeline (Seeman, available in: https://github.com/tseemann/abricate ) was used to search ARGs and VFs using the ResFinder v. 4.1 ( Zankari et al., 2012 ) and the virulence factor database (VFDB) ( Chen et al., 2016 ), respectively.
Since these genomic signatures combined with events of horizontal gene transfer (HGT), genome recombination and gene loss may lead to fluctuations in protein composition, the Overall Genome Relatedness Index (OGRI) metrics of the Average Amino Acid Identity (AAI), which was measured using the CompareM software toolkit, tend to decay ( Zheng et al., 1901 ) since this metric is calculated on the pair-wise mean of similarity of the entire set of orthologous proteins shared between two strains ( Konstantinidis and Tiedje, 2005 ). Therefore, external gene loss events and HGT distort ANI measurements. Thus, the determination of the Core Average Amino Acid Identity (cAAI) was also calculated using the get_homologues pipeline script get_homologs.pl (parameters: -A and -G -t 0), as it should minimize the impact of these external variables ( Zheng et al., 1901 ). Also, the distribution of OGRI was determined to assess whether strains from different isolation sites present distorted OGRI metrics.
Results A total of 99 strains of Acinetobacter sp. were downloaded from the NCBI genome database on June 04, 2020. Among the strains, 80 type strains were recovered. As the species A. dispersus, A. gyllenbergii, A. beijerinckii, A. puyangensis, A. boissieri, A. kookii, A. apis and A. qingfengensis did not present any type strain previously deposited on NCBI, 19 non-type strains were downloaded and the taxonomy was confirmed by ANI analysis to represent these species to exclude assemblies presenting ANI values lower than 95% (data not shown). Besides, to enhance phylogenetic reconstruction, all available genomes oftype strains of M. catarrhalis and P. immobilis were also downloaded and used as outgroups. To select a one-single representative genome by each species, the assemblies with the highest N90 values for contig size were selected ( Supporting information Fig. S1 ) and further evaluated regarding the completeness degree ( Supporting information Fig. S2 ).
The majority of assemblies presented most of the single-copy universal orthologous genes (>95%) for Pseudomonadales order, while A. apis , A. boissieri and M. catarrhalis presented 94%, 93% and 91%, respectively. Moreover, a low number of fragmented genes was observed due to the higher N90 values, indicating the genome assemblies presented satisfactory integrity to represent the real biological repertoire of that species ( Supporting information Fig. S2 ). The information regarding the selected genomes (n = 59) used in this study is shown in Supporting information Table S1 .
Phylogenomic reconstruction of the monophyletic genus Acinetobacter The cgML tree presented five main groups (clades) with strong support values. The topological distribution of Acinetobacter spp. evidenced they as a monophyletic group since formed a uniform clade split from the P. immobilis and M. catarrhalis outgroups. The first clade (from the top to the bottom) was composed of A. schindleri, A. variabilis, A. pseudolwoffii, A. lwoffii, A. indicus, A. towneri, A. bouvettii, A. pragensis, A. celticus, A. grandensis, A. cumulans, A. equi, A. johnsonii, A. tandoii, A. harbinensis, A. albensis, A. bohemicus, A. kooki, A. chinensis, A. guillouiae, A. bereziniae, A. wuhouensis, A. psicola, A. defluvii, A. gerneri, A. rudis, A. larvae , and A. radioresistens. The second clade was composed of A. proteolyticus, A. gyllenbergii, A. colistiniresistens, A. dispersus, A. courvalinii, A. parvus, A. beijerinckii, A. venetianus, A. junii, A. haemolyticus, A. halotolerans, A. pittii, A. lactucae, A. oleivorans, A. calcoaceticus, A. nosocomialis, A. baumannii, A. seifertii, A. baylyi, A. soli and A. ursingii. The third clade was composed of A. boissieri, A. apis, A. nectaris , and A. brisouii . Finally, the fourth clade was composed of A. populi, A. puyangensis and A. qingfengensis ( Fig. 1 ) .
Regarding the “Acb complex” members, the two phylogenies, with and without outgroups ( Fig. 1 and Supporting information Fig. S3 , respectively), presented the same tree topology and showed the close relationship between A. lactucae and A. oleivorans with canonical Acb members, forming a monophyletic group, which was supported by high bootstrap values (100%). These data state the phylogenetic association of A. lactucae and A. oleivorans as Acb members, and deconstruct the concept of “complex” as this term is misleading and under a phylogenetic point of view suits better for polytomies since the Acb members did not present a polytomic topology, but in fact, they presented distinct dichotomized branch lengths. Therefore, we refer to as Acb clade to mention all taxa grouped as a sub-clade of the clade II in the Acinetobacter spp. phylogeny.
Top gene markers selection and in silico reclassification of Acinetobacter species The get_phylomarkers pipeline returned 109 gene markers with the best metrics of phylogenetic signal, gene alignment length and support values (bootstraps) ( Supporting information Table S3 ). Among these genes, the top 40 were ranked by their lower phylogenetic signal and were globally aligned to calculate the percent identity among each orthologous cluster. Besides, these genes were also selected according to the parameters of alignment size and the Robinson-Foulds distance. Finally, the nine best gene markers (i.e., response regulator, recJ, recG, phosphomannomutase, pepSY, monovalent cation/H + antiporter subunit D, mnmE, glnE , and bamA ) were selected since presented a minimum of 3% of dissimilarity, being able to differentiate closely-related species ( Fig. 2 ).
To evaluate the effectiveness of the top gene markers, a custom BLAST database composed of the nine selected genes was built. A total of 305 unclassified Acinetobacter genomes were downloaded from the NCBI database and analyzed against that database. The nine best gene markers were able to unambiguously reclassify 150 genomes (49.2%) whose assignments were confirmed by the ANI measurement. By using this approach, several isolates were unequivocally reclassified, highlighting the detection of members of the Acb clade [i.e., A. nosocomialis (n = 46), A. pittii (n = 29), A. baumannii (n = 11), A. oleivorans (n = 2), A. calcoaceticus (n = 1), and A. seiferttii (n = 1)] obtained from different sources (e.g., humans, animals and the environment) from several countries ( Supporting information Table S4 ).
Curiously, the majority of unclassified genomes (54.7%) presented high numbers of sequences matching to more than one top gene marker presenting high-similarities above the minimum threshold of 97% to split closely-related species (data not shown). Besides, for some genomes, the absence of at least one best gene marker was common, indicating that these genomes were deposited as unclassified species probably due to presenting a high degree of fragmentation and low completeness status, which compromises the taxonomic assignment of the genome assemblies. Therefore, the results revealed the global gene similarity was the main limiting factor to split closely-related species, as even with the lowest phylogenetic signal, some bacteria presented overlapping similarities for some gene markers, and highlight that the gene markers should further be evaluated in terms of gene similarities to exclude those which may hamper species delineation, even being excellent for phylogenetic reconstruction.
Pangenome's constitution and the relationship between isolation site and phylogeny Pangenome analysis was conducted based on 14,095 genes consensually determined by COG and OMCL algorithms. From these, 972 were classified as core genes, 336 as soft-core genes, 3,540 as shell genes, and 9,247 as cloud genes. Both clustering methods estimated an open pangenome architecture ( Fig. 3 ), which indicates a tendency for gene acquisition by HGT. Besides, pangenomes ML trees did not evidence a clear correlation of bacterial isolation site neither for taxonomy nor for functional repertoire ( Fig. 4 ). Regarding taxonomy the isolation site of each strain was not determinant for the species clustering as the groups resembled mainly the cgML tree topology. This is expected when pangenomes are considered for phylogenetic reconstruction since independent processes, including gene loss, HGT and genome duplication events distort phylogenetic measurements.
The Acb clade members were maintained in the same cluster. In this case, the name “clade” does not apply, because the pangenome's tree is based on a binary matrix of presence and/or absence of genes and not on an evolution model considering the substitution rates. The same was observed in pangenome-based phylogeny, however, an external group was formed in relation to the other species of Acinetobacter ( Fig. 1 ; Fig. 4 ) . This fact may be explained by the constitution of the slightly differentiated pangenomes, which were enriched for genes related to energy production and conversion, amino acid transport and metabolism, inorganic ion transport and metabolism, and function unknown.
Core and accessory metabolic pathways of Acinetobacter species Clustering analysis of metabolic traits revealed interesting features in some Acinetobacter species. Considering core metabolic pathways ( Supporting information Fig. S4 ), 11 groups of species presented 100% of similarity in their core metabolic pathways due to the presence of a polytomy-like topology at the terminal branches they were clustered ( Fig. 5 A). The groups are: (I) A. pittii, A. nosocomialis , A. oleivorans and A. seifertii ; (II) A. lactucae, A. calcoaceticus and A. baumannii ; (III) A. courvalinii, A. dispersus and A. gyllenbergii ; (IV) A. bohemicus and A. albensis ; (V) A.baylyi and A. proteolyticus ; (VI) A. kookii, A. radioresistens and A. harbinensis ; (VII) A. populi and A. puyangensis ; (VIII) A. lwoffii and A. variabilis ; (IX) A. venetianus and A. halotolerans ; (X) A. haemoylticus and A. junii ; and (XI) A. parvus and A. tjernbergiae ( Fig. 5 A) .
Furthermore, the clustering of the accessory metabolic pathways ( Supporting information Fig. S5 ) revealed that the taxa grouped in the eleven clusters described above were differentiated in terms of an independent set of acquired metabolic pathways ( Fig. 5 B). However, in the two clustering analyses, no correlation was observed between the source of isolation and the functional potential of the species since the arrangement of the groups did not follow a pattern determined by the environment. The seven species of the Acb clade were grouped in a cluster composed of strains obtained from human and environmental samples. In addition, other associations were described, including A. courvalinii - A. dispersus - A. gyllenbergii recovered from non-human vertebrate and human samples, and A. lwoffii - A. variabilis , A. baylyi - A. proteolyticus and A. parvus - A. tjernbergiae isolated from humans and the environment ( Fig. 5 A, B).
The Fig. 5 B shows that the species were clustered according to the convergence of pathways involved in similar biochemical processes, even though some groups such as A. bohemicus - A. albensis , A. kookii - A. radioresistens - A. harbinensis , A populi - A. puyangensis , A. venetianus - A. halotolerans (isolated from environment) and A. haemolyticus - A. junii (isolated from humans) have been clustered in the same branch and according to a specific environment and the core pathways analysis. The same pattern is not repeated when considering the accessory metabolic pathways since most groups were clustered independently of isolation source. The clusters A. haemolyticus - A. junii , A. venetianus - A. halotolerans , A. kookii - A. radioresistens - A. harbinensis - A. bohemicus - A. albensis, and A. courvalinii-A.dispersus-A. gyllenbergii practically did not change. A principal component analysis ( Figure S6 ) shows that the metabolic pathways do not have a pattern defined by source of isolation, corroborating the findings of the cluster analysis and possibly indicating that the functional and taxonomic diversification of the species was not necessarily due to specific pressures of a given environment, but rather by partially being related to it and also to the independent acquisition of phenotypic traits in different environments, which corroborates the structure of open pangenome as well.
Genomic signatures The genomic signatures represented by genome size, G + C content, PCGs, codon and amino acid usage, k-mer frequencies, and stop codon usage biases variations were determined. The higher genome sizes were observed for species isolated from humans (mean of 3.9 Mb), while those retrieved from the environment, insects and non-human vertebrates exhibit average values of 3.5 Mb, 3.1 Mb and 3.6 Mb, respectively ( Fig. 6 A). The G + C content, instead, was congruent (mean of 40%) for bacteria recovered from the environmental, human and insect samples, while those prospected in non-human vertebrates presented the lower values of G + C content (36.5% to 39.5%) ( Fig. 6 B). The number of PCGs was proportional to genome size ( Fig. 6 A and C). Besides, no substantial differences were observed for the distributions of amino acid usage among species isolated from several habitats ( Fig. 6 D). The same pattern was also observed for stop codons ( Fig. 6 E), codons ( Fig. 6 F) and k-mers usage biases ( Fig. 6 G) since the species were not grouped according to their respective isolation sites.
Curiously, the mean value of cANI (65%) ( Fig. 6 H) was lower than that of ANI (73.8%) ( Fig. 6 I). Generally, cANI value is expected to be greater than ANI value since all genes shared by the species in the dataset are pair-wise compared. Therefore, the highest ANI values indicate convergent acquisition of homologous genes, while the multimodal distribution of ANI values indicates that subgroups of Acinetobacter species may have acquired the same homologous genes in a determined evolutionary time.
Resistome and virulome analysis ARGs and VFs were researched in order to detect genes shared among the strains (type and non-type) of Acinetobacter species. Among the 57 strains used in this study ( Supporting information Table S1 ), 33, including those isolated from the environment (n = 17), humans (n = 13) and non-human vertebrates (n = 3), presented at least one ARG. Neither of the two strains [ A. larvae (type strain) and A. apis (non-type strain)] recovered from the insects showed ARGs. Several ARGs that confer resistance to β-lactams, tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, macrolides, folate pathway antagonists, rifamycins, and phenicols were detected. A great diversity of bla OXA variants and genes encoding for aminoglycoside modifying enzymes (AMEs) (i.e., aac -type and aph -type) was detected among the Acinetobacter species obtained from the environment, humans and non-human vertebrates ( Fig. 7 ).
Some ARGs were detected only in strains from the environment [e.g., aac(6′)-Ig , aac(6′)-Ij , aac(6′)-Ix ], humans [e.g., bla NDM-1 , mph(E) , cmlB1 , aph(3′)-VIa ] and non-human vertebrates [ aac(6′)-Ir , aph(3′)-VIII ]. In contrast, different ARGs [e.g., bla ADC-25 , sul2 , tet(34) , aac(3)-IId , aph(6)-Id , aph(3′')-Ib ] were detected in strains from different sources. Surprisingly, the bla ADC-25 gene was detected only in species of the Acb clade (type strains) and at least one bla OXA variant [ bla OXA-98 , bla OXA-213 , bla OXA-271 , bla OXA-272 , and bla OXA-304 ] was shared among the species of the Acb clade, except for A. seifertii and A. nosocomialis ( Fig. 7 ).
All Acinetobacter species presented at least one virulence gene. A total of 39 different VFs were found, which are related to adherence ( ompA ), biofilm formation ( bfmRS , abaIR, bap, pgaABCD , adeFGH, csuABCDE, csuA/B ), pathogenesis [phospholipases C ( plc ) and phospholipases D ( plcD )], and iron uptake [acinetobactin ( entE , bauABCDEF , basABCDFGHIJ , barAB )]. Among the VFs, the bfmR gene was shared in all strains while the ompA gene was detected in 48 strains (84.2%). The other VFs were found mainly in the Acb clade, highlighting the presence of plcD , pgaC , bfmS , adeFH , and abaIR , which were detected only in the Acb clade ( Fig. 8 ). Based on these analyzes, it was observed that the ARGs and VFs are not related to the isolation source, the Acb clade has a specific ARG ( bla ADC-25 ) and some VFs may be used as gene markers for typing of the species in the Acb clade.
Discussion The 57 Acinetobacter species surveyed in this study were the basis for phylogenetic reconstruction of the entire Acinetobacter genus and also allowed to establish a clear division of the A. baumannii-A. calcoaceticus “complex” species in a defined clade. At the same time, the majority of the Acinetobacter species presented similar clusters of orthologous groups, justifying the limitation of phenotypic methods to differentiate these bacteria. From a phylogenetic point of view, the term “complex” does not apply, once these organisms can be easily unambiguously identified by the use of efficient gene markers. Moreover, based on the ecological signatures assessed, it was evidenced that these species can cause several diseases due to their ubiquitous distribution and possibly convergent adapted genetic potential.
In the light of phylogenetics, the term “complex” is misleading The term “Acbcomplex” refers to a group of heterogeneous bacteria that share similar phenotypical traits and are genotypically diverse ( Ayoub Moubareck and Hammoudi Halat, 2020 ). The Acinetobacter taxonomy, especially with a focus on the phylogenetic relationships of Acb members, has been revised due to the advent of the next-generation sequencing. Based on a core genome phylogenetic tree built with basis on 602 genes, Rooney et al . ( Rooney et al., 2016 ) determined as belonging to the “Acb complex” the species A. baumannii, A. nosocomialis, A. seifertii, A. lactucae, A. pittii, A. calcoaceticus, A. oleivorans , and genomospecies 1/3. Later, Nemec et al . ( Nemec et al., 2019 ), in a proteomic and phylogenomic-based study, corroborated the affiliations of A. lactucae inside the “Acb complex”. The results presented in this study corroborate with previous studies, revealing the Acinetobacter genus is a monophyletic group ( Touchon et al., 2014 ) and the “Acb complex” is composed by at least seven species (i.e., A. baumannii, A. calcoaceticus, A. lactucae, A. pittii, A. nosocomialis, A. seifertii , and A. oleivorans ). Among these species, A. oleivorans and A. lactucae were recently reported as members of the “Acb complex” by a phylogenomic study ( Mateo-Estrada et al., 2019 ).
In addition, in this study we advocate the use of “Acb complex” should be restricted for phenotypical purposes and not for phylogenomic surveys since it is misleading. Thus, the term “Acb complex” can arise doubts regarding the phylogenetic associations of the taxa, which is called polytomy (multifurcating branches in a tree). A polytomy may occur when resolution data are absent and/or due to fast divergent events, limiting the visualization of dichotomous relationships between species ( Lin et al., 2011 ). Therefore, since no polytomy was observed in the cgML tree and high bootstrap values for A. oleivorans and A. lactucae have been described in the literature, we reinforce that the term “Acb complex” should be replaced by “Acb clade” in studies involving molecular techniques.
Phylogenetic markers can unambiguously identify and differentiate Acinetobacter species Regarding the molecular methods to unequivocally differentiate Acinetobacter species, the PCR-based ones targeting the genes rpoB, recA and gyrB stands out as a complement to the 16SrDNA gene sequencing, which presents excellent discrimination at the genus level but is not resolving to split Acinetobacter spp. at the species level ( La Scola, 2006; Lee et al., 2014; Teixeira et al., 2017; Vijayakumar et al., 2019 ). The majority of the studies that described gene markers to discriminate Acb species by PCR-dependent methods were based on the screening of gene markers in a limited set of strains from culture collections. In addition, these studies were not concerned with the phylogenetic power of these gene markers in the context of the entire genus Acinetobacter ( Hamouda, 2017 ).
Therewith, Mateo-Estrada et al . ( Mateo-Estrada et al., 2019 ) proposed the 20 best gene markers to resolve species assignment inside the genus Acinetobacter based on 51 species. In this study, among the 624 genes found, seven (i.e., miA, bamA, ppsA, mfd, dxs, rlmD ,and rsmH ) were the best gene markers proposed by ( Mateo-Estrada et al., 2019 ). Additionally, the genes ppsA and rsmH were not detected among the best 109 gene markers found; however, these genes do not present any spurious sequence and can be employed for molecular identification of Acinetobacter species. Although some differences have been observed among the gene markers described in this study and those referenced by Mateo-Estrada et al . ( Mateo-Estrada et al., 2019 ), it is important to evidence that both approaches contribute to unravel useful gene markers to unambiguously identify and resolve Acinetobacter species affiliation worldwide, and hence, deserve special attention in further in vitro validation studies.
Pangenome tree and metabolic pathways do not evidence niche-specific adaptations Pangenome is a term which refers to the sum of core and accessory genes, this later concerning to the dispensable set of genes and divided into the shell genes (set of genes partially distributed among several taxa) and cloud genes (strain-specific genes) ( Vernikos et al., 2015 )⁠. Pangenome analysis revealed an open pangenome structure for the genus Acinetobacter . The open pangenome structure occurs due to the addition of new genomes in the dataset, leading to an increase in the number of gene families continuously ( Steps, 2020 ). This kind of pangenome is prone to receive genes by HGT and reflects strains niche-generalized and participating in the reticulated community interactions as opposed to closed pangenomes, which are generally related to niche-specific bacteria and characterize microbial populations with small sizes ( Brockhurst et al., 2019 ).
Acinetobacter species are ubiquitous in the environment ( Al Atrouni et al., 2016 )⁠, and have been found in soil ( Kim et al., 2008; Furlan et al., 2019 ), water ( Higgins et al., 2018 ), food ( Marí-Almirall et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020 ), insects ( Van Dexter and Boopathy, 2019; Wang et al., 2020 ), humans and non-human vertebrates ( Fyhrquist et al., 2014; Maboni et al., 2020 ). Furthermore, even presenting a pervasive distribution and an open pangenome architecture, the pangenome-based tree did not reflect any correlation of environmental bacteria and differences between functional potential and taxonomical placement. Although some clades have been dismissed in comparison to the cgML tree, the main phylogenetic relationships determined by the previously core tree were maintained. These findings added to the OGRI measurements indicate a possible convergence in gains by HGT since due to the high pangenome diversity (open pangenome architecture), higher ANI values were obtained with all genes instead of core ones. In addition, functional clustering pointed to the common features shared by all Acinetobacter spp. considering the entire pangenome composition, corroborating this hypothesis.
Regarding the clustering of putative functional potential, the Acb clade presented a slightly differentiated repertoire of genes in different categories. The metabolism of amino acids in Acinetobacter spp. have been demonstrated as a conserved functional category shared by several species ( Norsigian and Bernhard, 2018 ) and are frequently enriched in core and accessory genomes ( Lucas et al., 2020 ). The iron-related metabolism is an important virulence factor crucial for Acinetobacter spp. to adapt and evolve in a human host since iron is required for bacterial motility and impact physiological processes, such as respiration ( Eijkelkamp et al., 2011 ). Notably, the number of unknown genes in the Acinetobacter pangenome was higher in the Acb clade members. A higher number of uncategorized genes is commonly associated with recent HGT, which yields sets of genes poorly annotated on public databases ( Jeong et al., 2019 ).
The absence of specific genomic signatures suggests a generalist life-style for Acinetobacter spp. The comparison of genomic composition among Acinetobacter spp. revealed an increase in the size of the genome for bacteria derived from human and non-human vertebrate, which was directly proportional to the total number of PCGs, suggesting that the bacteria from humans and non-human vertebrates were not host-adapted since was not observed gene reduction, a marker of niche-specialization ( Petrovska et al., 2017 ). Moreover, associated with low genome sizes, the reduction of G + C content is also observed for intracellular symbiotic/pathogenic bacteria adapted to a host since nutrients starvation, temperature, carbon sources, nitrogen and nucleotides availability modulate genomic composition ( Dutta and Paul, 2012 ). Considering the dataset of this study, only the vertebrate-related strains presented a reduction of G + C content, which may be due to the differential coding-DNA sequences composition regarding the remaining species that was possibly caused by distant phylogenetic affiliations.
Vallenet et al . ( Vallenet et al., 2008 ) described lifestyles among two Acinetobacter species (i.e., A. baylyi strain ADP1 and A. baumannii strains AYE and SDF), which were isolated from soil, insect and human. Curiously, the strain isolated from insect presented a reduction in the genome size in comparison to the remaining A. baumannii strains, corroborating with the results found in this study. Additionally, some studies have suggested the codon usage biases provides good evidence to infer bacterial adaptation in several niches since fast-growing bacteria tend to compete better in an environment and those carrying a synonymous set of codons do not require an extensive tRNA machinery to translate proteins, saving energy and improving bacterial fitness. Thereby, HGT events are frequently observed in closely-related species as no additional tRNA repertoire is necessary for gene translation ( Dutta and Paul, 2012; Tuller, 2011; López et al., 2019 ).
The results reported in this study highlight that all Acinetobacter species presented very similar codon usage biases, stop codons, amino acids and k-mer frequencies, evidencing a conserved pattern of nucleotide and amino acids usage in species from several environments. However, these metrics fail to detect ancient HGT events ( Friedman and Ely, 2012; Sánchez-Soto et al., 2020 ) as the frequency of acquired sequences tends to adjust and harmonically incorporated into the host along the evolution time ( Tuller, 2011 ). As ANI analysis revealed gene gains and possible convergence of gene acquisition, these results suggest the putative HGT events may have been one of the strongest modulating forces on Acinetobacter speciation.
Clinically important ARGs and VFs shared among Acinetobacter sp. The emergence of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria has become a public health problem. Acinetobacter species rapidly develop multidrug resistance by different mechanisms, including chromosomal and plasmid-mediated β-lactamases, AMEs and efflux systems ( Wong et al., 2017 )⁠. The great diversity of bla OXA variants, including those that confer resistance to carbapenems, may be related to the genetic recombination ( Evans and Amyes, 2014; Li et al., 2015 ). Additionally, the bla OXA-like genes have been described in association with other clinically important ARGs, such as bla NDM-1 and bla CTX-M−115 ( Pfeifer et al., 2016; Maamar et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Fonseca et al., 2020 ). Chromosomal encoded bla ADC-like genes, that confer resistance to β-lactams, have been commonly described in the Acb clade, highlighting the association of genes bla ADC-25 and bla OXA-like ( Furlan et al., 2019; Li et al., 2015; Zong et al., 2008 ).
The Acb clade is commonly reported causing infections worldwide and the presence of VFs has been increasingly studied, mainly in A. baumannii . The biofilm formation implies a decrease in antimicrobial susceptibility, which can lead to multidrug resistance phenotype when associated with other mechanisms ( Colquhoun and Rather, 2020 ). Furthermore, the ompA gene, that is related to adherence and invasion and were detected in the majority of species, may be associated with significantly decrease the minimal inhibitory concentrations of aztreonam, nalidixic acid and chloramphenicol ( Smani et al., 2014 ). The co-occurrence of VFs, including siderophores and enzymatic mechanisms, in the Acb clade reinforce the ability of this species to cause hospital-acquired infections ( Lee et al., 2017 ). In this context, the sharing of ARGs and VFs among Acinetobacter species, mainly in the Acb clade, represents a major challenge in the clinical environment.
In conclusion, these findings associated with the functional potential and the absence of genomic signatures related to niche-specific adaptation corroborate the generalist life-style of Acinetobacter species, as no clustering for each one of these categories was dependent of the isolation source. The potential to cause disease is just an intrinsic particularity of the Acb clade members, apparently not subordinated to an adaptation to a determinate host. Therefore, the ubiquitous distribution of these species is a reflex of their generalist life-styles in several environments, justifying the need for a good surveillance system to avoid risks to human and animal healthy.