https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2021.107311
Title: Whole genome sequencing data of Klebsiella aerogenes isolated from agricultural soil of Haryana, India
Abstract: Klebsiella aerogenes , is a Gram-negative bacterium, which was previously known as Enterobacter aerogenes
. It is present in all environments such as water, soil, air and hospitals; and is an opportunistic pathogen that causes several types of infections. As compared to other clinically important pathogens included in the ESKAPE category (
Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species
), the pangenome and population structure of Klebsiella aerogenes is still poorly understood. For the present study, the bacterial sample was isolated from agricultural soils of Haryana, India. With an aim to identify the occurrence of multi-drug resistance genes in the agricultural field soil bacterial isolate, whole genome sequencing (WGS) of the bacteria was performed; and the antibiotic resistance causing genes, along with the genes responsible for other major functions of the cell; and the different Single Nuceotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) and Insertions and deletions (InDels) were identified. The data presented in this manuscript can be reused by researchers as a reference for determining the antibiotic resistance genes that could be present in different bacterial isolates, and it would also help in determination of functions of various other genes present in other genomes of
Klebsiella species. Value of the Data • This data is useful for the scientific community as it provides insights into the genome of a pathogenic bacterial isolate, mainly the type of genes present in it at particular positions. This data has its uniqueness, however, this genome could be used as a reference sequence to determine the presence of antibiotic resistance genes in an unknown or a new isolate whose genomic information is yet to be determined. • The presented data is useful as it was generated specifically to determine the presence of multi- drug-resistant genes present in the bacterial isolates prevalent in agricultural field soils. This data provides information about such genes, including- the name of the gene, the drug class to which they infer resistance to, their mechanism of action and sequence data; which could be used further to analyse resistance genes in other isolates. • Researchers involved with the work related to genomics data could also benefit from this data. Also, the researchers who are working in a wet lab, and who are interested in confirming the presence of a particular multi-drug-resistant gene in their isolate can use this data in order to design primers for their sequence.
Data Description The data in the present study is a part of a larger study where in the authors are interested in evaluating the effect of application of cattle manure used in the organic farms on the prevalence of the antibiotic-resistance-genes (ant r ) harbouring microorganisms in such soils. The rationale behind this study is the fact that most of the farm animals (cattle, pigs, poultry etc.) are being given antibiotic doses at continuous intervals (either to treat or prevent diseases in them, or, simply to increase their produce). Since antibiotics are not completely digested by these animals, they get excreted in their faecal matter; which in turn when used as fertilizers in organic farms, increases their presence in the soil environment. This also leads to a higher possibility of making the soil environment favourable for better survival of microorganisms having multiple antibiotic resistance genes. However, the present manuscript focuses on the data generated as a result of WGS of a MDR bacteria isolated from such soils.
This article consists of raw and analysed data. The data provided in this article shares the information of complete genome sequencing conducted using Illumina Nextseq, and also several other details, such as the presence of multi-drug-resistance genes, SNPs and InDels. The bacterial isolate which exhibited a high resistance to a set of four commonly used antibiotics was selected for whole genome sequencing, in order to determine the genes responsible for the occurrence of resistance in them. The sequence of this isolate was further analysed using bioinformatics tool to determine the presence of different types of genes and to find out their functions.
Fig. 1 represents the pathway followed while carrying-out the full experiment. First of all, raw reads were obtained, and then with the help of trimmomatic tool [3] , these raw reads were filtered and High Quality (HQ) reads were obtained. With the help of Burrows Wheeler transform (BWA) tool [4] , mapping of the contigs to a reference genome ( Klebsiella aerogenes KCTC 2190) was carried out. The Sequence Alignment or Map formation was done using SAM tools mpileup [5] , and consensus sequence was obtained. GC content was identified and by using Bedtools [6] , gene identification was carried out. The sequence was subjected to annotation and then submitted to NCBI portal. The antibiotic resistance genes were identified using ARDB database [7] .
The sequenced raw data was processed to obtain high quality clean reads using Trimmomatic (v 0.38) to remove adapter sequences, ambiguous reads (reads with unknown nucleotides- “N” larger than 5%), and low-quality sequences (reads with more than 10% quality threshold (QV) < 20 phred score). Parameters considered for filtration included: (a) adapter trimming; (b) minimum length threshold of 100 bp; (c) sliding window trimming of 10 bp, cutting once if the average quality within the window fell below a threshold of 20; (d) leading: cutting bases off the start of a read, if below a threshold quality of 20; (e) trailing: cutting bases off the end of a read, if below a threshold quality of 20. The high quality reads of the sample were aligned to the reference genome using BWA MEM (version 0.7.17). Respective consensus sequence was extracted using SAM tools mpileup.
Table 1 shows that the genome of the isolate “ Klebsiella aerogenes ” consists of 5,071,737 paired end reads, and the chromosomal DNA has 1,505,053,235 number of bases. The length of consensus sequence was found to be 5.27 Mb, with a GC content of 50.64%. After mapping to the reference genome, Klebsiella aerogenes KCTC 2190 (5.28 Mb length), the mapping percentage was found to be 91.04% when 90.47% genome was covered.
Table 2 shows the details of the Single Nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and Insertion-Deletions (InDels) obtained upon comparison of the genome of Klebsiella aerogenes isolated in the present study with the reference genome. The mpileup utility of SAM tools (v 0.1.18) was used to identify the SNPs and InDels from the sorted BAM file of each of the mappings (Excel sheet 1). The variants were filtered based on a minimum read depth of 15, and a quality threshold of 25. The identified variants were annotated using BED tools, an intersect tool. A total of 53,604 SNPs were obtained, among which 52,092 were observed to be homozygous SNPs, whereas 1,512 were heterozygous SNPs. Among the annotated SNPs, 48,654 were genic SNPs and 4,950 were intergenic SNPs. The total number of InDels identified was 222, among which 195 were homozygous InDels, and 27 were heterozygous InDels. Among the annotated InDels, 50 were genic InDels and 172 were intergenic InDels.
Fig. 2 shows the presence of all the important genes found in this genome. The pie chart was developed by rapid annotation using subsystem technology toolkit (RASTtk) [8] (rast.nmpdr.org) and has been viewed in SEED server ( https://pubseed.theseed.org/ ) [8] . A total number of 4749 coding sequences were observed to be present in the subsystem. The bar chart on the left-hand side of the figure shows the subsystems coverage in percentage (blue bar corresponds to the percentage of proteins not in the subsystem, and the green one represents the percentage of proteins in the subsystem). The pie chart to the right shows the distribution of 27 most abundant subsystem categories out of a total of 2118 subsystem categories.
Excel sheet 1 consists of four sheets, the first and the second sheet contain details about all SNPs, about all InDels, respectively. The third excel sheet details information about all genic SNPs, and the fourth one details information about all genic InDels.
Excel sheet 2 represents the details of all the genes monitored by RASTtk server including the type of gene, location of gene, start and stop codon, type of strand, function of the gene, aliases, figfam, evidence codes, the nucleotide and the amino acid sequence.
Excel sheet 3 shows the presence of identified Antibiotic Resistance genes using ARDB. The genes identified in the sample were screened against ARDB ( https://ardb.cbcb.umd.edu/blast/genome.shtml ), and a total of 28 antibiotic resistant genes were identified (Excel sheet 3).
Experimental Design, Materials and Methods Soil sample collection sites Haryana state is considered as the land of agriculture and most of its area is used for agricultural purposes. Soil samples were collected from different agricultural fields representing each of its 22 districts. From each district two types of agricultural farms were selected i.e. organic farm and inorganic farm; and from each type of farm, three soil samples were collected from different locations [9] . In this way, the study consisted of a total of 132 samples, consisting of six samples from each district (three of each type).
Isolation and purification of bacterial isolates Bacterial population was isolated from the collected soil samples by using standard serial dilution plate technique. From the collected soil, 5g soil sample was mixed in 45ml distilled water and volume was made up to 50ml (to prepare soil stock solution) and vortexed to mix properly. An aliquot of 1ml of the soil stock solution was taken and mixed in 9 ml of sterile physiological saline and vortexed to mix properly. The sample was then serially diluted up to 10 −8 dilution, and an aliquot of 100 µl each from 10 −4 , 10 −5 , 10 −6, 10 −7 , 10 −8 dilutions of the soil samples was used for spread plating onto nutrient agar plates, which were then subjected to incubation for 24–48h. Any plates with fungal growth were discarded. However, the nutrient agar plates having colonies between 30–100 were finally selected [10] . The colonies exhibiting differences in morphology were picked-up and streaked on nutrient agar plates (quadrant streaking method), and re-streaked again several times until pure colonies were obtained. Pure cultures were stored in agar slants at 4°C for subsequent studies. A total of 135 pure bacteria were isolated from the collected soil samples. Gram's staining was performed to classify the isolated bacteria into Gram-positive and Gram-negative strain.
Antibiotic susceptibility screening of the soil bacterial isolates All 135 pure bacterial colonies were streaked in triplicate on nutrient agar medium, which was supplemented with 5µg/ml of four antibiotics (penicillin, streptomycin, tetracycline and erythromycin), separately on different petri plates. The plates were incubated at room temperature from 24 to 72h. This approach for evaluation of antibiotic susceptibility of microorganisms has been reported earlier as well [11] . Out of these 135 pure colonies, 122 exhibited resistance to at least one antibiotic (72, 4, 24 and 22 bacteria resistant to penicillin, tetracycline, streptomycin and erythromycin, respectively). These 122 strains were further subjected to antibiotic resistance screening tests at higher concentrations of antibiotics i.e. 10, 15, 20, 25µg/ml. Bacterial strains showing maximum growth up to 25µg/ml for at least 3 or all 4 antibiotics were picked and were stored at 4°C on antibiotic agar plates, and in nutrient broth supplemented with 10% glycerol at −80°C for further use in characterization studies. Among a total of 13 such isolates, ten isolates were resistant to at least three antibiotics, and only three isolates exhibited resistance to all four antibiotics. These 13 isolates were selected for further molecular characterization studies.
Molecular characterization and identification of bacterial strain The selected 13 isolates were subjected to16SrRNA based molecular identification. The results revealed that nine isolates belonged to different Bacillus strains, one isolate was identified as Ochrobactrum intermedium , and three isolates which were resistant to all four selected antibiotics (up to 25µg/ml conc. for penicillin, streptomycin, erythromycin and 15µg/ml for tetracycline) were Klebsiella aerogenes . Based on the resistance profile of these three Klebsiella isolates, one isolate, i.e. G3, was selected for whole genome sequence analysis.
Selection of the soil bacterial isolate for whole genome sequencing The bacterial isolate G3 which was found to exhibit maximum resistance to all the four antibiotics, was selected for further WGS and annotation. The whole genome of this bacterium (identified as Klebsiella aerogenes ) was further subjected to sequencing using Illumina NextSeq technique and results were analyzed using several bioinformatics tools. The whole genome sequence of this isolate was annotated by mapping to a reference Klebsiella aerogenes (KCTC 2190) genome to study the differences and similarities between the bacteria isolated in the present study and similar such isolates already reported in the NCBI database.
Ethics Statement None.