https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2021.09.021
Title: Deep phylo-taxono genomics reveals Xylella as a variant lineage of plant associated Xanthomonas and supports their taxonomic reunification along with Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas
Abstract: Genus Xanthomonas is a group of phytopathogens that is phylogenetically related to Xylella, Stenotrophomonas,
and Pseudoxanthomonas, having diverse lifestyles. Xylella is a lethal plant pathogen with a highly reduced genome, atypical GC content and is taxonomically related to these three genera. Deep phylo-taxono genomics reveals that
Xylella is a variant Xanthomonas lineage that is sandwiched between Xanthomonas clades. Comparative studies suggest the role of unique pigment and exopolysaccharide gene clusters in the emergence of
Xanthomonas and Xylella clades. Pan-genome analysis identified a set of unique genes associated with sub-lineages representing plant-associated
Xanthomonas clade and nosocomial origin Stenotrophomonas clade. Overall, our study reveals the importance of reconciling classical phenotypic data and genomic findings in reconstituting the taxonomic status of these four genera.
Significance statement Xylella fastidiosa is a devastating pathogen of perennial dicots such as grapes, citrus, coffee, and olives. An insect vector transmits the pathogen to its specific host wherein the infection leads to complete wilting of the plants. The genome of
X. fastidiosa is significantly reduced both in terms of size (2 Mb) and GC content (50%) when compared with its relatives such as
Xanthomonas, Stenotrophomonas, and Pseudoxanthomonas that have higher GC content (65%) and larger genomes (5 Mb). In this study, using systematic and in-depth genome-based taxonomic and phylogenetic criteria and comparative studies, we assert the need to unify
Xanthomonas with its relatives ( Xylella , Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas ). Interestingly, Xylella
revealed itself as a minor variant lineage embedded within two major Xanthomonas lineages comprising member species of different hosts.
Introduction Family Lysobacteraceae ( Xanthomonadaceae ) [ 14 , 44 ] encompass bacteria from diverse ecological niches. Within this family, Xanthomonas , Stenotrophomonas, Xylella, and Pseudoxanthomonas are closely related genera that forms a phylogroup (referred to as XSXP phylogroup in this study) [ 34 ]. XSXP constituent members are characterized by a yellow pigment xanthomonadin and exopolysaccharide xanthan gum production [ 11 , 17 , 27 , 31 , 37 , 59 ]. XSXP phylogroup has a long history of taxonomic reshuffling based on phenotypic, morphological characteristics, and genotypic methods. These genotypic methods were based on a single gene such as 16S rRNA, rpoB, or gyrB gene or multiple housekeeping genes [ 51 , 65 , 76 , 77 ]. The taxonomic and phylogenetic relationships amongst XSXP based on classical methods have always been debatable. For instance, the basionym of Xanthomonas and Stenotrophomonas were Bacillus campestris [ 48 ] and Pseudomonas maltophilia, respectively [ 29 ]. Further, Bacillus campestris including few groups of the plant pathogens were later classified as Xanthomonas campestris [ 19 ] . Similarly, Pseudomonas maltophilia was transferred to genus Xanthomonas as X. maltophilia [ 72 ], and later it was designated as a distinct and new genus Stenotrophomonas [ 47 ]. Similarly, Xylella [ 74 ] and Pseudoxanthomonas [ 22 ] were defined as species related to Xanthomonas . However, these taxonomic assignments remain inconclusive as these were based on limited evidences of classical taxonomy such as 16S rRNA identity or biochemical properties, etc. Current standing in the nomenclature of Lysobacteraceae ( https://lpsn.dsmz.de/family/lysobacteraceae ) classifies XSXP phylogroup as four distinct genera (i.e., Xanthomonas , Pseudoxanthomonas, Stenotrophomonas , and Xylella ). This is based on conserved sequence indels (CSI) and phylogeny of only 28 proteins [ 43 , 44 ]. However, CSI phylogeny also suggests the intermingling of some species of these four genera [ 43 , 44 ]. Further, the genome taxonomy database (GTDB) also supports inclusion of several genera in the XSXP phylogroup. GTDB classification is based on 120 conserved genes and relative evolutionary divergence values [ 52 ]. However, recent focused studies reported incongruence to the GTDB proposed taxonomy [ 36 , 78 ] and suggests the need to use objective indices that are whole genome based for genus assignment [ 9 ]. Moreover, GTDB proposed classification for XSXP phylogroup is not yet reported in the literature, and hence, its evolutionary and taxonomic status is worth discussing in a focused manner.
Taxonomy and phylogeny go hand in hand. Amongst XSXP, the existence of two major phylogroups within genus Xanthomonas (group 1 and group 2) appears as early as in the 1960s [ 15 ]. Later on, single gene phylogeny of 16S rRNA and gyrB [ 25 , 50 , 56 , 70 ] defined group 1 as early branching. Group 1 is highly diverse, which constitutes species like X. albilineans with the reduced genome [ 56 ] , X. sontii following non-pathogenic lifestyle [ 3–5 ] in addition to several pathogens like X. sacchari, X. translucens, etc. Whereas group 2 is the largest and constitutes well-described pathogens such as X. oryzae, X. citri, X. campestris, etc. [ 25 , 50 ].
However, the phylogeny of two devastating phytopathogenic genera Xanthomonas and Xylella, based on single or multi-locus housekeeping genes have been debatable over the years [ 56 , 64 , 70 ]. These studies did not resolve their relationship, and either placed Xylella within group 1 and group 2 [ 56 ] of Xanthomonas or as a distinct monophyletic lineage [ 64 ]. Furthermore, 16S rRNA based phylogeny have also placed Xanthomonas and Stenotrophomonas as coherent group excluding Xylella [ 56 ].
With recent advancements, genomics is at the center of revolution in bacterial taxonomy and phylogeny. Whole genome comparisons of Xanthomonas and Xylella have revealed a high degree of identity and co-linearity of their chromosome backbone [ 39 , 73 ]. Even though their genomes have diverged by potential indels mediated by mobile genetic elements, Xylella shares 74% of the genes with Xanthomonas [ 40 , 39 ]. Xylella genome size is roughly two-third of the Xanthomonas genome with a minimal complement of genes required for its survival within the host [ 37 ]. Like Xylella , X. albilineans is also a xylem-limited plant pathogen with a reduced genome and characterized by the absence of Hrp-T3SS (hypersensitive response and pathogenicity–type III secretion system) [ 56 ]. However, genome reduction events in genus Xanthomonas are not limited to group 2 ( X. albilineans ) but also reported in group 1, i.e., Xanthomonas vasicola [ 62 ]. All these preliminary genome level investigations based on limited strains provide certain clues of Xanthomonas, and Xylella relatedness. Yet small genome size, low GC content and dual lifestyle of Xylella has compelled taxonomists to consider it as a different genus [ 13 ]. However, in the microbial world genome erosion cannot warranty for a new genus rather, it leads to a highly specialized pathogen. For instance, Mycobacterium leprae having almost 50% of the genome reduced as compared to M. tuberculosis [ 24 ].
The phylogenetic investigation that led to current standing in nomenclature was based on just 28 conserved proteins and less number of XSXP phylogroup species. Moreover, intermingled phylogeny of Xanthomonas and Xylella in the CSI phylogeny was also overlooked in the current standing in nomenclature ( https://lpsn.dsmz.de/family/lysobacteraceae ) [ 43 , 44 ] and our earlier whole genome based studies on the families of Lysobacteraceae ( Xanthomonadaceae ) [ 34 ]. Hence, this does not provide true evidence for considering XSXP phylogroup as four distinct genera. The increasing pieces of evidence of relatedness amongst the XSXP phylogroups below the genus level is gradually strengthening. However, to get robust taxonomy based on phylogenomic framework, a comprehensive genome level investigation considering all representative species of XSXP is required. Present deep whole genome-based phylogenetic and evolutionary investigation reveals that all the four genera indeed belong to the same genus Xanthomonas with Xylella as a variant lineage emerged during diversification of Xanthomonas into two major groups consisting of member species primarily infecting monocot and dicot plants. Such a deep phylo-taxono genomics or DEEPT genomics study of XSXP has significant implications in understanding the co-evolution of microbes with their host.
Results Genomic features of XSXP phylogroup Genomic features of type strains of the XSXP phylogroup are summarized in Table 1 . The genome size of Xanthomonas is around 5 Mb and approximately 3–5 Mb for Pseudoxanthomonas and Stenotrophomonas, whereas, the genome size of Xylella is approximately 2.5 Mb. This reduction in genome size is also reflected in the number of coding sequences in the range of 3000–4000 for Xanthomonas, Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas, but around 2100 for Xylella. Furthermore, the average GC content of the genome for all the members of Xanthomonas , Stenotrophomonas, and Pseudoxanthomonas is ~65%, except for Xylella that has a GC content of around 51%. Despite of dramatic genome reduction, Xylella is displaying a comparable number of tRNAs, i.e., 48.
Phylogenomics of XSXP phylogroup To investigate the relationship amongst the member species of the XSXP phylogroup, we constructed and compared genome-based phylogeny by three different approaches. Based on an earlier study of a family with basonym Xanthomonadaceae ( Lysobacteraceae ) and order with basonym Xanthomonadales ( Lysobacterales) , we used Luteimonas mephitis DSM12574 T as an outgroup of XSXP [ 34 ]. Phylogeny constructed (including XSXP phylogroup and Luteimonas mephitis DSM12574 T as outgroup) based on a large set of genes core to the bacterial world (>400 genes) ( Fig. 1 A) and set of genes core to XSXP phylogroup by Roary (382 genes across 99–100% isolates) [ 46 ] and PIRATE (1149 genes across 95–100% isolates) [ 10 ] ( Fig. 1 B, Supplementary Fig. 1 ) correlated with each other (pl. see methods) ( https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.15831948 ). Core genome level phylogeny revealed that amongst XSXP phylogroup, Pseudoxanthomonas members were more diverse and ancestral to the other three genera. Interestingly, the other three genera formed two mega clades (MC) i.e. plant pathogens Xanthomonas and Xylella comprised one MC referred to as XX-MC, and Stenotrophomonas included another MC referred to as S-MC. XX-MC consists of three clades. Clade I contains at least 27 species that are primarily pathogens of dicot plants which was earlier considered as group 2 [ 25 , 50 ]. Clade III comprises at least 6 species that are primarily a pathogen of monocot plants including X. albilineans with reduced genome and X. sontii with non-pathogenic lifestyle earlier considered as group 1. Clade II comprised both the species of Xylella sandwiched in between clade I and clade III of genus Xanthomonas. Members of clade I are pathogens of dicots, except 5 species that have monocot hosts, i.e., X. vasicola, X. oryzae, X. axonopodis, X. bromi, and X. maliensis . On the other hand, members of clade III are pathogens or associated with monocots, except X. theicola infecting dicots. Interestingly, Stenotrophomonas panacihumi, an environmental species, is reflected as a singleton phylogenetic outlier of clade I and clade II. In the case of S-MC, we found clade IV comprising of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia complex (Smc) of clinical origin .
To investigate the relationship amongst the member species of the XSXP phylogroup, we constructed and compared genome-based phylogeny by three different approaches. Based on an earlier study of a family with basonym Xanthomonadaceae ( Lysobacteraceae ) and order with basonym Xanthomonadales ( Lysobacterales) , we used Luteimonas mephitis DSM12574 T as an outgroup of XSXP [ 34 ]. Phylogeny constructed (including XSXP phylogroup and Luteimonas mephitis DSM12574 T as outgroup) based on a large set of genes core to the bacterial world (>400 genes) ( Fig. 1 A) and set of genes core to XSXP phylogroup by Roary (382 genes across 99–100% isolates) [ 46 ] and PIRATE (1149 genes across 95–100% isolates) [ 10 ] ( Fig. 1 B, Supplementary Fig. 1) correlated with each other (pl. see methods) ( https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.15831948 ). Core genome level phylogeny revealed that amongst XSXP phylogroup, Pseudoxanthomonas members were more diverse and ancestral to the other three genera. Interestingly, the other three genera formed two mega clades (MC) i.e. plant pathogens Xanthomonas and Xylella comprised one MC referred to as XX-MC, and Stenotrophomonas included another MC referred to as S-MC. XX-MC consists of three clades. Clade I contains at least 27 species that are primarily pathogens of dicot plants which was earlier considered as group 2 [ 25 , 50 ]. Clade III comprises at least 6 species that are primarily a pathogen of monocot plants including X. albilineans with reduced genome and X. sontii with non-pathogenic lifestyle earlier considered as group 1. Clade II comprised both the species of Xylella sandwiched in between clade I and clade III of genus Xanthomonas. Members of clade I are pathogens of dicots, except 5 species that have monocot hosts, i.e., X. vasicola, X. oryzae, X. axonopodis, X. bromi, and X. maliensis . On the other hand, members of clade III are pathogens or associated with monocots, except X. theicola infecting dicots. Interestingly, Stenotrophomonas panacihumi, an environmental species, is reflected as a singleton phylogenetic outlier of clade I and clade II. In the case of S-MC, we found clade IV comprising of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia complex (Smc) of clinical origin .
Taxonogenomics of XSXP phylogroup To delineate members of XSXP at the genera and species level, we further carried out taxonogenomic analysis ( https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.15831948 ). Apart from the phylogenetic trees based on large sets of genomic markers and core genome, new criteria that are objective, reproducible, whole genome-based and mathematical are also becoming available for delineating members at the genus level [ 9 ]. For genus demarcation, 73.98% average nucleotide identity (ANI) and 0.33 alignment fraction (AF) are cut-offs set which are obtained by large-scale genus comparisons [ 2 , 9 , 61 ]. Further, criteria such as average amino acid identity (AAI) and percentage of conserved protein (POCP) have been proposed for genus delineation with 60–80% and 50% cut-offs, respectively [ 32 , 58 ]. POCP is affected by genome size and hence cannot be applied for Xylella that has undergone extreme genome reduction [ 26 , 58 ]. However, core genome-based phylogenetic trees and AAI are not affected by genome reduction and can be employed to establish the identity and relationship of genera irrespective of genome size and/or GC content [ 26 , 32 , 71 , 26 , 32 , 71 ]. Interestingly, according to the genus demarcation values, minimum AF and ANI values for the XSXP phylogroup excluding Xylella were 0.35 and 76.54%, respectively, depicting Xanthomonas, Stenotrophomonas, and Pseudoxanthomonas belong to the same genus ( Supplementary Table 1 ). Further, according to the AAI cut-off value, all the strains of XSXP belong to the same genus i.e., Xanthomonas ( Fig. 2 A) and hence need to be merged into a single genus Xanthomonas. Similarly, according to POCP cut-off of 50%, all members of Xanthomonas, Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas belong to a single genus ( Fig. 2 B). Furthermore, within XX-MC, 27 species formed clade I while the other 6 species formed clade III. Further, ANI values clearly depicted that all clade I and clade III members belong to different species except for X. alfalfa, X. perforans, X. euvesicatoria and X. gardneri, X. cynarae , which represent heterotypic synonyms ( Supplementary Fig. 2 ) . Clade II is composed of Xylella genus . In S-MC, the Stenotrophomonas maltophilia complex (Smc) consists of 6 species with two of them being clinical origin i.e., S. maltophilia and S. africana .
To delineate members of XSXP at the genera and species level, we further carried out taxonogenomic analysis ( https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.15831948 ). Apart from the phylogenetic trees based on large sets of genomic markers and core genome, new criteria that are objective, reproducible, whole genome-based and mathematical are also becoming available for delineating members at the genus level [ 9 ]. For genus demarcation, 73.98% average nucleotide identity (ANI) and 0.33 alignment fraction (AF) are cut-offs set which are obtained by large-scale genus comparisons [ 2 , 9 , 61 ]. Further, criteria such as average amino acid identity (AAI) and percentage of conserved protein (POCP) have been proposed for genus delineation with 60–80% and 50% cut-offs, respectively [ 32 , 58 ]. POCP is affected by genome size and hence cannot be applied for Xylella that has undergone extreme genome reduction [ 26 , 58 ]. However, core genome-based phylogenetic trees and AAI are not affected by genome reduction and can be employed to establish the identity and relationship of genera irrespective of genome size and/or GC content [ 26 , 32 , 71 , 26 , 32 , 71 ]. Interestingly, according to the genus demarcation values, minimum AF and ANI values for the XSXP phylogroup excluding Xylella were 0.35 and 76.54%, respectively, depicting Xanthomonas, Stenotrophomonas, and Pseudoxanthomonas belong to the same genus (Supplementary Table 1). Further, according to the AAI cut-off value, all the strains of XSXP belong to the same genus i.e., Xanthomonas ( Fig. 2 A) and hence need to be merged into a single genus Xanthomonas. Similarly, according to POCP cut-off of 50%, all members of Xanthomonas, Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas belong to a single genus ( Fig. 2 B). Furthermore, within XX-MC, 27 species formed clade I while the other 6 species formed clade III. Further, ANI values clearly depicted that all clade I and clade III members belong to different species except for X. alfalfa, X. perforans, X. euvesicatoria and X. gardneri, X. cynarae , which represent heterotypic synonyms (Supplementary Fig. 2) . Clade II is composed of Xylella genus . In S-MC, the Stenotrophomonas maltophilia complex (Smc) consists of 6 species with two of them being clinical origin i.e., S. maltophilia and S. africana .
Pan-genome analysis and genome dynamics in XSXP We performed pan-genome analysis using Roary v3.12.0 [ 46 ] with 50% or greater amino acid identity revealed 47,624 gene families and 397 core genes for the XSXP phylogroup. Further, 48, 53, 205, and 175 genes were unique to clade I, III, II and IV respectively ( https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.15831948 ) (Supplementary Tables 2–5). Interestingly, clades II and IV constituting Xylella and Smc, respectively are having a higher number of unique genes. Inspection of clade IV unique genes revealed a type II secretion system, peroxidase, peptidases, efflux pumps and transporters like antibiotics/antimicrobials, fluoride ions, solvent, TonB dependent receptors, transcriptional regulators, etc. (Supplementary Table 5). Further, unique genes of clade II belong to adhesin like type IV pili formation apart from glycosyltransferases, methyltransferases, etc. (Supplementary Table 4). Overall, COG classification revealed that hypothetical proteins are dominant class in all the clades suggesting unknown functions playing a role in their success. Interestingly, in both clade I and III, COG class related to “signal transduction mechanisms” is the second major class after hypothetical proteins, clade II has more of “cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis”, “secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism” and “coenzyme transport and metabolism”. Whereas clade IV had more “transcription”, “signal transduction mechanisms”, “intracellular trafficking, secretion and vesicular transport”, “cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis” and “inorganic ion transport and metabolism” ( Fig. 3 ).
Variable patterns of recombination within XSXP To characterize genome-wide mosaicism in the XSXP phylogroup, we ran fastGEAR [ 41 ] on individual sequence alignments of the core and accessory genes or the pan genes. We found that 5434 genes out of 47,162 pan genes had experienced recombination representing 11.5% of the pangenome (Supplementary Table 6). Here, 53,125 were the total recombining events detected, out of which only 30% were detected from XX-MC, and the remaining 70% were detected in genera Pseudoxanthomonas and Stenotrophomonas ( Fig. 4 ). Amongst XX-MC, the least recombination events (72 out of 53,125) were detected in Xylella.
We observed heterogeneity in recombination sizes, the majority of the recombination (~82%) were of less than 100 bp recombining fragments while the maximum recombining fragment was 4469 bp (Supplementary Table 6, 8). Further, 14 highway pairs were detected in the XSXP phylogroup, the majority related to Pseudoxanthomonas and Stenotrophomonas ( Fig. 5 , Supplementary Table 7). Here, highways are likely to represent specific lineages that function as hubs of gene flow. Here, the highest recombination events were detected in Pseudoxanthomonas while least in Xylella strains.
Xanthomonadin pigment and xanthan exopolysaccharide gene cluster Distinct yellow xanthomonadin pigment, responsible for yellow-colored colonies, encoded by pig gene cluster, and the thick mucus exopolysaccharide or xanthan encoded by gum gene cluster are characteristic features of canonical plant-associated Xanthomonas species [ 27 , 31 , 59 ] . Since we are expanding the breadth of the Xanthomonas genus based on phylo-taxono genomics parameters, we scanned for the presence of these clusters in the genomes of XSXP constituent genera and species members ( Fig. 6 ). Amongst the XX-MC, the pig and gum gene clusters are present in all the members of Xanthomonas and Xylella , except for X. theicola and X. albilineans which do not have gum gene cluster. While both the clusters are highly conserved in sequence and distribution in clade I and III members of clade II show incomplete and possibly degenerated clusters, with gumN, gumM, gumI, gumG and gmuF absent from the gum cluster and orfs 8, 11, 13 and 14 absent from the pigment cluster.
In members of the other two genera understudy ( Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas ), these clusters are absent or incomplete in majority of the members. Specifically, while all members of genus Stenotrophomonas lack gum gene cluster, 5 out of 20 species of Pseudoxanthomonas, i.e., P. jiangsuensis, P. composti, P. spadix, P. wuyuanensis and P. sacheonensis harbours gum gene cluster. Whereas, xanthomonadin cluster is widely present in other two genera i.e., 7 out of 19 Stenotrophomonas and 13 out of 20 Pseudoxanthomonas species ( Fig. 6 ). Remarkably, none of the clade IV of some clinical isolates has both clusters except for orfs 1, 2 and 12 of xanthomonadin cluster.
Discussion The ability to sequence the genomes of bacterial strains in a cost-effective and high-throughput manner is transforming how we understand genetics, phylogeny, and taxonomy. Inferring the phylogeny based on limited and highly-conserved sequence information such as 16S rRNA and housekeeping genes can be misleading not only at the species level but also at higher taxonomic levels [ 68 ]. The genomic investigation is a robust way to establish an organism's identity, biology, and ecology in the proper context. Genome-based comprehensive taxonomic studies at various levels, such as order Methylococcales, order Bacillales, genus Borrelia, and genus Lactobacillus , have resolved the relationships and provided a robust basis for reclassification [ 18 , 38 , 45 , 67 , 78 ]. Whole genome studies using representative reference strains and type species of genera allowed us to resolve misclassifications at the level of families in the order Lysobacterales ( Xanthomonadales) [ 34 ]. Whole genome studies also allowed the resolution of misclassifications at the level of species and clones [ 6 , 8 , 34 ]. In the genus Stenotrophomonas , we reported a large and hidden Stenotrophomonas maltophilia complex (Smc) consisting of at least nine species [ 55 ]. Smc is a dynamically evolving group of human opportunistic pathogens with extreme drug resistance [ 23 , 33 ]. However, deeper inter-genera and intra-genera genome-based investigations at the phylogenetic and taxonomic levels are lacking for the XSXP phylogroup. Considering the importance of the members of the XSXP phylogroup for plant and human health apart from their biotechnological potential, we performed an in-depth investigation by incorporating all the representatives of four closely-related genera through modern genome-based criteria.
Such a comprehensive phylo-taxono genomics study revealed the role of evolutionary and ecological diversity in the formation of clades that actually belong to the genus Xanthomonas but have been historically classified into distinct genera such as Xylella , Stenotrophomonas, and Pseudoxanthomonas [ 66 ]. The basal, multiple, and diverse groups comprising species of the genus Pseudoxanthomonas suggest it to be ancestral to the other three genera. Hence, it is not surprising that this large genus is named as Pseudoxanthomonas [ 22 ] . At the same time, the presence of a major clade comprising the member species of Stenotrophomonas and another one consisting of Xanthomonas-Xylella species suggests further specialization based on habitats or ecology. This phenomenon is obvious in the canonical plant-associated and pathogenic Xanthomonas-Xylella species that form a distinct mega clade, unlike the mega clade(s) represented by member species of Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas whose members are highly versatile. Besides, this finding indicates the role of lifestyle in the diversification and formation of clades that were previously reflected as separate taxonomic units at the genera level when using only limited genotypic and phenotypic data. More importantly, we were also able to establish a robust phylogenetic relationship amongst the constituent member genera and species in XSXP using multiple phylogenomic approaches. In our case, this was possible because of the phylogenetic foundation provided by the species of Pseudoxanthomonas for the other three genera, asserting the significance of the genomic resource of the former . This proves the power of deep phylogenetic studies covering all member species and closely related genera.
Establishing the position of Xylella , which has a fastidious nature and an extremely lower GC content along with highly reduced genome size, is of critical importance. While it is evident that at the taxonogenomic level all the four genera are not distinct but belong to one genus, the element of surprise is that the genus Xylella is more related to Xanthomonas than to Stenotrophomonas . This variant lineage was confirmed by the sandwiched phylogenomic position of Xylella within the XX-MC. The event that led to a sudden decrease in the GC content by >10% and genome size by ~50% is difficult to discern, and further studies in this regard are required. Our DEEPT studies imply that such an event could have happened during the diversification of Xanthomonas into pathogen of dicots from monocots.
Conservation of the xanthomonadin pigment and gum gene clusters in clade I and clade III suggest the essentiality of the pigment and the exopolysaccharide in the obligate plant-associated lifestyle. Since plants are directly and continuously exposed to light, it is important for a successful phytopathogen to have a unique pigment such as xanthomonadin [ 59 ]. It has been shown that xanthomonadin protects against photodamage in X. oryzae pv. oryzae that infects rice [ 59 ]. As plants are also known to produce large amounts of antimicrobial compounds and secondary metabolites [ 60 ], there is a need for a unique and thick polysaccharide coat. In fact, highly mucoid and distinct yellow-colored colonies support our hypothesis that these clusters are evolved in the canonical Xanthomonas species from XX-MC. Both these clusters were found to be more diversified in clade III than in clade I, which can be linked to the majorly dicot-associated lifestyle of the latter as compared to the majorly monocot associated lifestyle of the former. The leaves of monocots and dicots are different, which may affect the penetration of light and its effect on bacteria. Nonetheless, this hypothesis needs to be proven by further studies. Both the clusters degenerated or incomplete in the case of clade II, which can be associated with the dual lifestyle of Xylella that occurs within the foregut of the insect and within the plant where it is directly injected into the xylem [ 13 ]. Since Xylella is never exposed to light and plant defense response, unlike the canonical Xanthomonas (i.e., clade I and III), it is not surprising that its clusters are not under natural selection. Genetic studies have revealed that the pig cluster is not required for virulence in plants [ 59 ]. Hence, the conservation of this cluster in clade I and III in the absence of its role in virulence suggests that the epiphytic mode is also crucial in plant adaptation [ 49 ].
The distributed presence of pig and gum clusters in a few members of XSXP outside the XX-MC suggests that these clusters are ancestral and were present as incomplete clusters in the population even before the emergence of Xanthomonas clades. Eventually, they must have undergone diversification and selection when a member of XSXP came in contact with the plants. The ancestor of XX-MC probably possessed both the clusters, thereby conferring an advantage for the plant-associated lifestyle. However, the presence of primitive, ancestral, and incomplete pigment and gum gene clusters indicates that these clusters are not of foreign origin but inherent to the ancestral XSXP population.
Even though Xylella seems to have undergone drastic genome reduction, the acquisition of many unique genes with particular functions has played a vital role in its emergence as a successful phytopathogen with an insect/plant dual lifestyle. In both these variant lineages, i.e., clade II and IV, the gaining of functions related to regulation suggests that apart from gene gain, the regulation of core or novel genes has also been responsible for their success. The commonality of the unique genes with regard to functions such as “intracellular trafficking, secretion, and vesicular transport”, “defense mechanism”, “replication, recombination, and repair” and “cell cycle control, cell division, and chromosome partitioning” reiterate their opportunistic, variant origin and parallels in evolution for dual/opportunistic lifestyle. Even though both exhibit dual lifestyles, unique gene analysis allowed us to pinpoint the functions associated with their success, such as adhesion in Xylella and efflux proteins/peroxidise (for multidrug resistance, adaptation to hospital setting, etc.) along with a novel type II secretion system in Smc. In an opportunistic human pathogen, a novel type II secretion system may compensate for the absence of type III secretion system in Smc [ 16 ].
Even within the Stenotrophomonas group or S-MC, the formation of a clade corresponding to the MDR nosocomial pathogen points to the ongoing evolution and diversification as witnessed in the case of Xylella within XX-MC. This finding is valuable in furthering our understanding of this emerging opportunistic human pathogen. Unique genes in clade I and III may be related to their adaptation to dicots and monocots, respectively. While many unique genes encode hypothetical proteins suggesting the importance of further functional genetic studies in clade I, II, III and IV, other major classes also provide clues regarding their evolution. One such hint is the importance of signal transduction in clade I and III, which can serve as key targets for basic and applied studies of dicot and monocot pathogens. Further systematic gene content analysis by excluding the variants within this group will also allow us to obtain insights into those genes that are important for the adaptation of Xanthomonas to monocots and dicots. Overall, our study reiterates the power and potential of systematic and large-scale or deep taxonogenomics.
Reconciliation, reconstitution and emended description of the genus Xanthomonas [19] Taxonomy in the pre-genomic era was dominated by classical polyphasic studies like phenotypic, microscopic, biochemical, fatty acids, quinines, etc. Any slight variation in the phenotypic data had led to the assignment of new genus amongst Xanthomonas- like species [ 66 ] such as Pseudomonas [ 29 , 72 ] , Stenotrophomonas [ 47 ], Pseudoxanthomonas [ 22 ] and Xylella [ 74 ] . Pseudoxanthomonas shares phenotypic traits with Xanthomonas like species such as colony colour, cell shape, Gram staining, presence of branched chain fatty acid pattern and ubiquinone with eight isoprenoid units. Yet, Xanthomonas- like strains with the ability to reduce nitrite but not nitrate to N 2 O and by the lack of C13: 0 iso 3-OH fatty acid were designated as genus Pseudoxanthomonas ([ 22 , 66 , 75 ]. Similarly, xylem-limited Xanthomonas like fastidious strains with 51%–53% GC content were designated as separate genus Xylella [ 74 ] . Both Xanthomonas and Xylella are rod shaped and share same ecological niche and lifestyle as primarily plant pathogen [ 13 ]. Apart from similarities in fatty acid profile [ 66 ], both are reported to produce xanthan gum and exopolysaccharide [ 13 , 63 ]. Presence of fimbriae, multiple flagella, and inability to produce xanthan gum and xanthomonadins distinguished another new genus Stenotrophomonas amongst the Xanthomonas -like species [ 47 ]. At the same time, polar flagella, similarity in cellular fatty acid composition, presence of ubiquinone, spermidine, phage sensitivity, ability to hydrolyze tween 80 and other conserved characteristics support earlier classification into genus Xanthomonas [ 66 , 72 ]. Hence, it is not surprising that Pseudoxanthomonas (as the name indicates) and Stenotrophomonas were earlier classified or identified as Xanthomonas strains [ 22 , 66 , 72 ]. The discrepancies can be reconciled in the light of present deep phylo-taxono genomics findings and comparative studies of characteristic gene clusters.
Even then, these genera have a characteristic common presence of branched-chain fatty acid pattern and ubiquinone with eight isoprenoid units (Q-8) ([ 22 , 66 , 72 ]. Hence, the classification of Xanthomonas- like species as distinct genera has been controversial, leading to several reclassifications [ 35 , 47 ]. Also, plant or human-associated microbes have influenced their assignment into separate genera. The advent of genomics has highlighted the role of horizontal gene transfer in the diverse lifestyles of these microbes. Acquisition of genes would have provided much needed functions in rapid and successful adaption to humans (in case of S. maltophilia complex) [ 54 ] and insect host (in case of Xylella ) [ 13 ].
Hence, there is a need to reconcile the published phenotypic data in the light of genomic data and the relationship of all four genera. The current standing in the nomenclature of family Lysobacteraceae is based on CSI phylogeny (using only 28 conserved proteins) which describes these Xanthomonas like species into distinct genera Xanthomonas, Xylella, Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas [ 43 , 44 ] . However, CSI phylogeny itself suggests the taxonomic position of Xylella in between Xanthomonas group 1 and group 2, which is not a true evidence for considering Xanthomonas and Xylella as distinct genera [ 44 ]. Even, whole genome-based study of Order Lysobacterales ( Xanthomonadales ) also reveals close relationship of Xanthomonas and Xylella amongst the XSXP phylogroup [ 34 ].
In the present study, we provide whole genome based deep phylo-taxono genomic evidences that clearly depicts the existence of unary genus for all Xanthomonas like species ( Xanthomonas, Xylella, Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas ). Here, we have implemented three different robust approaches to obtain core-genome phylogeny of XSXP phylogroup, i.e., PhyloPhlAn (>400 genes), Roary (382 across 99–100% isolates), and PIRATE (1149 genes across 95–100% isolates). Core genome phylogeny obtained from these methods reveals sandwiched positioning of Xylella between two groups of Xanthomonas. While Pseudoxanthomonas was ancestral amongst XSXP phylogroup. Further, genus delineation using ANI, AF, AAI, POCP clearly depicted Xanthomonas, Stenotrophomonas, and Pseudoxanthomonas as single genus. However, Xylella cannot be assessed using genome similarity assessment other than AAI, due to its drastic reduction in genome size (leading to low number of CDS and GC content). In light of deep phylo-taxono genomics findings along with published polyphasic data, XSXP phylogroup warrants reunification and need to consider Xylella, Stenotrophomonas and Pseudoxanthomonas as synonyms of Xanthomonas.
Materials and methods Genome procurement from public repository A total of 76 strains were used in the present study. Genome sequences of 33, 20, 20, and 3 were type strains of Xanthomonas,Pseudoxanthomonas,Stenotrophomonas, and Xylella , which were available from the NCBI database ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ) . All the genomes were then accessed using checkM v1.1.0 [ 53 ] with the cutoff of less than 3% contamination and completeness ( Table 1 ).
Whole genome-based phylogeny Phylogenomic analysis based on more than 400 putative conservative genes was carried out using PhyloPhlAn v3.0 [ 1 ]. Here, USEARCH v5.2.32 [ 21 ], MUSCLE v3.8.3 [ 20 ], and FastTree v2.1 [ 57 ] were utilized for orthologs searching, multiple sequence alignment, and phylogenetic construction, respectively. All strains of XSXP phylogroup and Luteimonas mephitis DSM12574 T (used as an outgroup) were used for construction of the phylogeny.
In order to obtain a more robust whole genome phylogeny, core genome based phylogeny was constructed using MAFFT v7.31 [ 42 ] ( https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/ ) and the FastTree v2.1 [ 57 ], which was integrated within the Roary v 3.12.0 [ 46 ] with identity cut-off of 60%. Implementation of the tools can be found in detail under the section of pan-genome analysis.
As here, the XSXP phylogroup consist of divergent genomes and to further confirm the core genomes deduced by Roary and their phylogeny, we have used PIRATE [ 10 ]. This is better known to identify orthologue groups of diverged gene sequences by using amino acid identity threshold of 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90% and 95%.
Taxonogenomic analysis Genome relatedness was assessed using the average amino acid identity (AAI), percentage of conserved protein (POCP) and average nucleotide identity using (ANI). AAI was calculated using CompareM v0.0.23 ( https://github.com/dparks1134/CompareM ), which uses the mean amino acid identity of orthologous genes between a given pair of genomes. POCP is another method to evaluate the genome relatedness at genus level, which is based on amino acid conservation. POCP is calculated with the blast search using the default settings [ 58 ] ( https://figshare.com/articles/POCP-matrix_calculation_for_a_number_of_genomes/5602957 ). Further, FastANI v1.3 [ 30 ] an alignment-free sequence mapping method with default settings was used to calculate ANI values with default settings. Alignment fragment (AF) which is a ratio of mappings and total fraction with ratio of query genome was also calculated using FastANI v1.3 [ 30 ].
Pan-genome analysis Pan-genome analysis of the strains was performed using Roary v3.12.0 [ 46 ]. Here, .gff files generated by Prokka v1.13.3 [ 69 ] were used as input for Roary pan genome analysis. Since we are analyzing genomes from different species, the identity cut-off used was 60%. Functional annotation of the core genes identified was performed using eggNOG v4.5.1 [ 28 ].
Recombination analysis To identify recombination, we used fastGEAR [ 41 ] with default parameters on individual genes of the pan genome identified by Roary. HERO uses output of fastGEAR to identify donors and recipients in the recombination events. It also mapped recombination events to the sequence clusters identified by core genome-based phylogeny (Supplementary Table 6) to elucidate potential drivers of biases in recombination partners.
The custom script has been provided with HERO on its GitHub page ( https://github.com/therealcooperpark/hero ) as “sidekick.py” for reproducibility and convenience when using HERO in similar workflows.
Cluster analysis Protein sequences of the gene clusters [ 7 ] were used as query and tBLASTn searches were performed on the XSXP phylogroup genomes. Here, tBLASTn searches were performed using standalone BLAST+ v2.9.0 [ 12 ] and cut-offs used for identity and coverage were 50% and 50%, respectively. Heatmap for the blast searches was generated using GENE-E v3.03215 ( https://software.broadinstitute.org/GENE-E/ ).
The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary Fig. 1 Core genome phylogeny of the XSXP phylogroup. Here, core genome alignment is obtained by using PIRATE. Supplementary Fig. 1 Supplementary Fig. 2 OrthoANI value calculated for the XSXP phylogroup . Supplementary Fig. 2 Supplementary Table 1 Average nucleotide identity (ANI) and alignment fraction (AF) amongst the XSXP phylogroup. Supplementary Table 2: Genes unique to clade I, its COG classification and its protein sequence. Supplementary Table 3: Genes unique to clade III, its COG classification and its protein sequence. Supplementary Table 4: Genes unique to clade II, its COG classification and its protein sequence. Supplementary Table 5: Genes unique to clade IV, its COG classification and its protein sequence. Supplementary Table 6: Recombination events detected within XSXP phylogroup. Supplementary Table 7: Sequence clusters amongst the XSXP phylogroup. Supplementary Table 8: Genes undergoing recombination amongst the XSXP pangenome. Supplementary Table 1
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2021.09.021 .