https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02181-21
Differentiating Closely Affiliated Dehalococcoides Lineages by a Novel Genetic Marker Identified via Computational Pangenome Analysis
ABSTRACT As a group, the genus Dehalococcoides dehalogenates a wide range of organohalide pollutants, but the range of organohalide compounds that can be utilized for reductive dehalogenation differs among Dehalococcoides strains. Dehalococcoides lineages cannot be reliably disambiguated in mixed communities using typical phylogenetic markers, which often confounds bioremediation efforts. Here, we describe a computational approach to identify Dehalococcoides genetic markers with improved discriminatory resolution. Screening core genes from the Dehalococcoides pangenome for degree of similarity and frequency of 100% identity found a candidate genetic marker encoding a bacterial neuraminidase repeat (BNR)-containing protein of unknown function. This gene exhibits the fewest completely identical amino acid sequences and has among the lowest average amino acid sequence identity in the core pangenome. Primers targeting BNR could effectively discriminate between 40 available BNR sequences (in silico) and 10 different Dehalococcoides isolates (in vitro). Amplicon sequencing of BNR fragments generated from 22 subsurface soil samples revealed a total of 109 amplicon sequence variants, suggesting a high diversity of Dehalococcoides distributed in the environment. Therefore, the BNR gene can serve as an alternative genetic marker to differentiate strains of Dehalococcoides in complicated microbial communities.
IMPORTANCE The challenge of discriminating between phylogenetically similar but functionally distinct bacterial lineages is particularly relevant to the development of technologies seeking to exploit the metabolic or physiological characteristics of specific members of bacterial genera. A computational approach was developed to expedite screening of potential genetic markers among phylogenetically affiliated bacteria. Using this approach, a gene encoding a bacterial neuraminidase repeat (BNR)-containing protein of unknown function was selected and evaluated as a genetic marker to differentiate strains of Dehalococcoides, an environmentally relevant genus of bacteria whose members can transform and detoxify a range of halogenated organic solvents and persistent organic pollutants, in complex microbial communities to demonstrate the validity of the approach. Moreover, many apparently phylogenetically distinct, currently uncharacterized Dehalococcoides were detected in environmental samples derived from contaminated sites.
INTRODUCTION Members of the genus Dehalococcoides are obligate organohalide-respiring bacteria which play essential roles in the biological dehalogenation of a variety of anthropogenic halogenated organic contaminants in anoxic environments. Many Dehalococcoides are capable of complete detoxification or extensive dehalogenation of organohalide contaminants, including chlorinated solvents and persistent organic pollutants (1–7). Dehalococcoides are ubiquitously distributed in the environment, from pristine to heavily contaminated soil and sediments (8), but typically represent a vanishingly small fraction of microbial communities. Despite this ubiquitous distribution of Dehalococcoides in the environment, the diversity of Dehalococcoides populations remains largely unknown, partly due to difficulties in cultivating this fastidious group of bacteria via cultivation-dependent approaches. Although cultivation-independent approaches such as high-throughput sequencing technologies have been used to explore the diversity of specific functional microorganisms, their application in investigating diversity of Dehalococcoides is largely limited by the inability to use conventional 16S rRNA gene-based genetic markers to discriminate different Dehalococcoides strains. Therefore, to gain more insights into the diversity of Dehalococcoides in the environment, it is of vital importance to design new genetic markers that can efficiently and reliably discriminate different Dehalococcoides strains.
Successful bioremediation of a range of organohalide contaminants has been achieved using bioaugmentation solutions that exploit Dehalococcoides strains which dehalogenate specific aliphatic chlorinated solvents (9–12). Yet wider implementation of Dehalococcoides for in situ remediation of halogenated aromatic compounds, such as polychlorinated biphenyls and polybrominated diphenyl ethers, remains a challenge because of the complexity of the dehalogenation pathways and the potential involvement of multiple functional Dehalococcoides populations (13, 14). Among Dehalococcoides, a heterogeneous class of enzymes termed reductive dehalogenases (RDases) is responsible for reductive dehalogenation. RDases were long thought to have a high degree of substrate specificity, though recent studies have demonstrated that many of these enzymes can catalyze dehalogenation of structurally dissimilar compounds (5, 15–17). Published Dehalococcoides genomes harbor a diverse number of nonredundant RDase encoding genes (rdhA). Therefore, probes targeting functionally characterized rdhA are often used for preliminary assessment of in situ dehalogenation potential. However, where dehalogenation occurs by an unknown or uncharacterised RDase, monitoring of functional populations is effectively stymied. Yet detection of specific or orthologous rdhA in microbial communities is often inconsistent with observed dehalogenation activity (18). A possible explanation for this is the unreliable correlation between dehalogenation activity and rdhA sequence, which is evident in the lack of correspondence in dehalogenation activity of Dehalococcoides strains harboring genes encoding RDases that share >90% amino acid identity (19). Nonetheless, the dehalogenating activity of organohalides in Dehalococcoides strains is generally stably maintained under nonselective pressures even after long-time subculturing; this stability of each strain in dehalogenation implies that high-resolution monitoring of Dehalococcoides at the strain level may lead to better prediction of dehalogenation activity, which also requires development of reliable genetic marker(s).
In this study, we developed an approach to screen the core genes in the Dehalococcoides pangenome to identify a more suitable genetic marker to distinguish between Dehalococcoides populations in mixed microbial communities. Candidate genetic markers were compared and evaluated for their ability to detect and differentiate Dehalococcoides populations in isolated cultures and to investigate the diversity of Dehalococcoides strains in subsurface soil samples collected from contaminated environmental sites.
RESULTS Identification and selection of Dehalococcoides genetic markers. Genetic markers were selected from the Dehalococcoides pangenome based on five hierarchical criteria intended to maximize selectivity and usability: (i) presence in all known Dehalococcoides strains; (ii) number of completely identical sequences pairs; (iii) degree of dissimilarity between sequences; (iv) similarity to other bacterial genera; and (v) copy number. Dehalococcoides genomes are highly streamlined, ranging in size from 1.27 to 1.52 Mbp, and harbor between 1,294 to 1,597 predicted coding sequences (see Table S1 in the supplemental material). A Dehalococcoides pangenome was constructed from 26 complete Dehalococcoides genomes available in GenBank (accessed August 2020; Table S1) using the Bacterial Pan Genome Analysis Tool (BPGAT [20]). The pangenome contained a total of 3,114 pangenome gene families, 952 core gene families, 1,305 accessory gene families, and 857 unique gene families. BPGAT estimated the size of the Dehalococcoides pangenome to be 3,159.34 genes. The exponent of an exponential equation derived empirically from the pangenome curve was 0.25, indicating that this pangenome is not yet closed and that additional genomes may contribute meaningfully to the pangenome (Fig. S1). The 952 core gene families were used as the pool for genetic marker selection.
Each core gene encoded at least 2 identical amino acid sequences among the 26 genomes included in the pangenome (Table S2), and those that had no more than 10 identical pairs were selected for further analysis (core groups 23, 37, 46, 178, 234, 315, 797, and 936, with average identities between 73% and 95%). A gene of 2,931 to 3,099 bp encoding a bacterial neuraminidase repeat (BNR)-containing protein of unknown function (BNR; core group 46) had a much lower average identity (73.02%) than any of the other candidates and had the fewest identical pairs (2 pairs; strains KBTCE2/KBTCE3 and KBDCA1/KBDCA2). This BNR-containing protein of unknown function appears to be unique to the Dehalococcoides, sharing no significant similarity with any other amino acid or nucleotide sequence in the nonredundant protein and the nucleotide collections maintained by NCBI. It is absent from other genera that are closely related to the Dehalococcoides (most notably, Dehalogenimonas; data not shown). The amino acid sequences encoded by the different BNR genes have 1 to 2 transmembrane helices, an N-terminal signal peptide, a WD40/YVTN repeat-like domain, and a fibronectin type III superfamily domain (Fig. S2). These motifs do not provide any meaningful insight into the function of this protein, though the presence of a YVTN-type repeat domains has been determined in archaeal surface-layer proteins that protect cells from extreme environments (21). BNR is located in a highly syntenic region approximately 50 kb upstream of the HPR2 region in the large majority of Dehalococcoides genomes included in the pangenome (Table S3). The amino acid sequences of markers that are commonly used to identify and quantify Dehalococcoides, i.e., RpoB (core group 14), GyrB (core group 202), and RecA (core group 866), were present in the core genome and had 16, 80, and 140 identical pairs, respectively, and average similarities above 95%. Interestingly, RD_OG 23 (core group 480) was the only RDase present in the core genome and, like RpoB, GyrB, and RecA, it had a high number of identical pairs but a notably lower average identity (64 and 86.3%, respectively). This screening approach concluded that BNR was likely to have the greatest capacity to differentiate between Dehalococcoides strains.
In silico evaluation and comparison of candidate Dehalococcoides genetic markers. The discriminatory capacity of BNR was compared in silico to that of the 16S rRNA gene, which is the most frequently used marker to identify and enumerate Dehalococcoides. Because the 16S rRNA gene does not encode a functional protein, nucleotide sequences were used for this in silico comparison. In addition to the BNR nucleotide sequences available in the 26 complete genomes included in the pangenome, 14 full-length BNR sequences in publicly available Dehalococcoides draft genomes and shotgun sequencing data (a total of 40 sequences) were included in this analysis; all available full-length Dehalococcoides 16S rRNA gene sequences (38 total) were included. Increasing the number of sequences in the analysis from 26 to 40 increases the total number of possible pairwise combinations of any two sequences from 276 to 780, broadening the description of sequence variability among Dehalococcoides strains. BNR had notably fewer combinations of two identical sequences (9 of 780 possible combinations, 1.2%) than did the 16S rRNA gene (176 of 703 possible pairwise combinations in 38 full-length nucleotide sequences, 25.0%), indicating that BNR could potentially discriminate >98.8% of possible combinations of any two known Dehalococcoides (Table 1). Five of the nine pairs of identical BNR amino acid sequences (Fig. 1, Table S4) contain sequences derived from the set of uncultivated bacteria and archaea (UBA) (UBA5846, UBA5818, UBA5545, and UBA5554) whose genomes were constructed in a meta-analysis of publicly available metagenome read sequence archives, two were the identical pairs noted in the initial screen (KBTCE2/KBTCE3 and KBDCA1/KBDCA2), and the final two were strains 11a5/SG1 and KS/RC. The lower average identity among the BNR sequences compared to Dehalococcoides 16S rRNA gene sequences and the lower number of identical pairs suggest that BNR is a more descriptive genetic marker for Dehalococcoides than the 16S rRNA gene (Fig. 1, Fig. S3, Table 1). A dendrogram of the 40 BNR sequences showed three distinct clusters, dividing the sequences into three unequal groups. Each of these groups contains strains belonging to more than one of the phylogenetic subgroups (i.e., Cornell, Victoria, and Pinellas) commonly used to describe different Dehalococcoides strains (Fig. 1).
An analysis of the degree of similarity and number of identical pairs of other commonly used genetic markers, including sequences from publicly available draft Dehalococcoides genomes in addition to those included in the core pangenome, found 54 (of 861), 243 (of 741), and 382 (of 903) pairwise combinations of identical amino acid sequences in RpoB, GyrB, and RecA, respectively (Table 1, Table S4) and average similarities of at least 97% among the amino acid sequences of each. The amino acid sequences of the BNR-containing protein had dramatically fewer identical pairs and lower average identity than other commonly used genetic markers.
Primers targeting a portion of the BNR sequence can differentiate Dehalococcoides strains. Primers targeting different BNR regions and producing amplicons of different lengths were designed to elicit the BNR sequences of Dehalococcoides populations in uncharacterised samples and to investigate the diversity and abundance of Dehalococcoides in mixed microbial communities. In addition to primers BNR658F-2979R, which target a 2,220-bp region containing conserved and variable regions, five primer pairs with 200∼300-bp amplicons within the BNR658F-2979R region were designed (Table 2). PCR of template DNA derived from environmental samples known to contain no Dehalococcoides did not produce amplicons with any of these primer pairs, confirming in silico predictions that all six primer pairs were specific to the genus Dehalococcoides (Table S5). Notably, none of the six primer pairs produced amplicons from the sample containing Dehalogenimonas, which is the nearest phylogenetic neighbor to Dehalococcoides.
The primers BNR658F-2979R were predicted to cover all publicly available BNR sequences and produced amplicons of the correct size and sequence when used to target DNA from 10 different Dehalococcoides isolates. While the regions amplified by the other primer pairs were not predicted to produce amplicons from all 40 available BNR sequences, primers BNR2246F-2445R and BNR2791F-2971R were both predicted to have 100% coverage at 1 bp mismatch, and they produced amplicons of the expected size and the correct sequence from all 10 Dehalococcoides isolates in PCR assays. Nevertheless, the primer pairs BNR485F-714R, BNR1484F-1683R, and BNR2790F-3081R failed to produce amplicons in 1 to 3 isolates (Table S5). A dendrogram constructed from the sequences amplified by the BNR658F-2979R primers was similar to the dendrogram constructed from the full-length sequences (Fig. S4), suggesting that this region was sufficient for discriminating between Dehalococcoides strains.
To assay the qPCR sensitivity of each of these primer pairs, a mixture of known concentrations of DNA extracted from Dehalococcoides isolates and DNA extracted from a Dehalogenimonas-containing enrichment was constructed and used as the template for qPCR. The limits of detection (LOD) of BNR2246F-2445R and BNR2791F-2971R were 6.19 and 9.3 gene copies/reaction, respectively, and the limits of quantification (LOQ) were 1.53E + 01 and 3.25E + 01 gene copies/reaction, respectively. Primer specificity was verified by the presence of a single peak in the melt curve of amplicons generated by qPCR of genomic DNA derived from axenic Dehalococcoides populations and in mixtures containing nontarget genomic DNA and genomic DNA of a single Dehalococcoides strain as the template (Fig. S5). As expected, slight variations in the length and sequences of amplicons generated from different Dehalococcoides populations resulted in the presence of multiple peaks in the melt curve of amplicons generated in these cycles (Fig. S5B and C). While it does indicate a potential reduction in the quantitative validity in environmental samples due to the degree of dissimilarities in the sequence lengths of amplicons produced by BNR2246F-2445R and BNR2791F-2971R, the variability in the dissociation temperatures of these amplicons demonstrates the value of these primers as a reliable tool for discriminating Dehalococcoides.
The discriminatory capacity of amplicons generated from each primer pair was also evaluated using PCR-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). A 40-bp GC clamp was attached to the 5′-termini of primers BNR2246F-2445R and BNR2791F-2971R to optimize DGGE resolution. When targeting the 10 Dehalococcoides isolates, higher specificity, fewer mismatches, and better band separation were observed with the GC clamp on primer BNR2971R (denoted BNR2971RGC) paired with primer BNR2791F, and on primer BNR2246F (denoted BNR2246FGC) paired with primer BNR2445R (Fig. 2). The resolution of the BNR2246FGC-2445R and BNR2791F-2971RGC primers compared favorably to that of the 16S rRNA gene-based primer pair Dehalococcoides-1FGC-259R. BNR2246FGC-2445R and BNR2791F-2971RGC produced 10 and 9 (strains 11a and 11a5 being identical in this region) discrete bands, respectively, from a mixture containing DNA from 10 different Dehalococcoides strains, while 1FGC-259R and 341FGC-518R yielded only four and three bands from the same mixture, respectively.
While primers targeting internal regions of marker genes facilitate the practical application of genetic markers for microbial community characterization, the full-length BNR sequence provided a higher degree of resolution among Dehalococcoides strains.
Environmental diversity of Dehalococcoides. A low abundance of Dehalococcoides, ranging between 8.67 ± 0.16 × 102 and 2.94 ± 0.63 × 105 16S rRNA gene copies per g soil, was detected in 25 environmental samples by qPCR using the 16S rRNA gene-based Dehalococcoides genus-specific primer pair Dhc1200F-Dhc1271R (22) (Fig. 3). Comparably, Dehalococcoides abundance ranging from 9.13 ± 0.20 × 102 and 3.27 ± 0.25 × 105 BNR gene copies per g soil was detected by qPCR with the BNR specific primer pair BNR2246F-2445R. The Dehalococcoides abundance as shown with both the 16S rRNA gene-based primer pair and the BNR gene-based primer pair showed no significant difference (t > 0.05), suggesting comparable coverage of Dehalococcoides by both primer pairs.
High-throughput amplicon sequencing with primers BNR2246F-2445R was used to investigate the diversity of Dehalococcoides populations in these 25 environmental samples. Due to the low abundance of Dehalococcoides in environmental samples, nested PCR BNR658F-2979R followed by BNR2246F-2445R was adopted to yield amplicons for subsequent analysis. A total of 22 out of 25 environmental samples yielded amplicons from nested PCR with a single band of the correct size and sequence (Fig. S6). The relative abundance of Dehalococcoides in the three samples that did not yield amplicons from nested PCR (sites 1, 2, and 4) was less than 0.003%. A total of 109 amplicon sequence variants (ASVs), distributed unequally across the 22 samples, was identified after quality filtering, chimera removal, and exclusion of singletons. The representative sequences of the 109 ASVs were queried against the NCBI nonredundant nucleotide collection and whole-genome shotgun contigs databases using NCBI-BLAST, and all ASVs had significant identity only with gene sequences associated with Dehalococcoides (Fig. 4). The ASVs were classified using a scikit-learn naive Bayes classifier trained against a bespoke database comprising the target region (2,246 to 2,445) of all BNR sequences available in public databases. A total of 31 ASVs were classified as one of five distinct Dehalococcoides strains (Fig. 4, Table S6), at least one of which represented >10% of the total Dehalococcoides in 13 of the 22 samples. The ASVs were differentially abundant within each sample (mean Pielou evenness = 0.523 ± 0.116). Minority fractions of the total abundance in any one sample tended to be dominated by 1 or 2 ASVs (mean Simpson’s diversity index = 0.785 ± 0.105; Fig. 5A), and 2 to 5 different ASVs represented ≥ 10% of the total ASV abundance in any one sample (Fig. 5B). A total of 26 unique ASVs was present above 10% of the total abundance of any one sample (Tables S7 and S8).
DISCUSSION The 16S rRNA gene has long been used to detect and putatively categorize bacterial genera in complex microbial communities. The high degree of identity between the 16S rRNA gene sequences of closely related members of some genera, such as the members of the genus Dehalococcoides, makes it all but impossible to discriminate or even identify different populations in environmental samples or enrichment cultures using the 16S rRNA gene as a marker. While intergenic spacer regions (ISR), e.g., the 16S to 23S ISR, have been successfully targeted for differentiation of many bacterial genera (23, 24), including dehalogenating bacteria (25), the unusual arrangement of 16S and 23S rRNA genes in Dehalococcoides precludes the use of this ISR for differentiating Dehalococcoides (26). In Dehalococcoides, rdhA genes are frequently used as secondary markers with 16S rRNA gene to provide higher taxonomic resolution in mixed cultures, yet the variability in rdhA sequences in any given Dehalococcoides genome and the limited number of functionally characterized rdhA limits the applicability of these genes as suitable markers (27).
Here, we constructed the Dehalococcoides pangenome to identify candidate genetic markers that could better discriminate Dehalococcoides populations in mixed cultures. In silico analyses indicated that a gene encoding a BNR-containing protein of unknown function present in the core Dehalococcoides pangenome had a higher degree of dissimilarity among different Dehalococcoides strains than commonly used Dehalococcoides markers, i.e., 16S rRNA gene, rpoB, gyrB, and recA. Subsequent evaluations in silico and in vitro demonstrated the viability and reliability of BNR as a marker, validating the applicability of this approach to genetic marker selection. This method could be applied to expedite identification of marker regions in other genera for which 16S rRNA gene sequence-based identification provides insufficient taxonomic resolution.
The rate at which a sequence accumulates mutations is a relevant concern for the development of novel genetic markers, and the high degree of dissimilarity in BNR gene sequences may indicate a tendency for this gene to accumulate mutations. Among 40 full-length BNR genes available in GenBank, only 9 identical combinations (out of 780 possible pairwise combinations) were found in pairwise alignments. Five of these nine pairs of identical sequences are present in genome sequences from the set of UBA, which were assembled in a meta-analysis of metagenome sequencing projects (21). These five identical pairs were between four UBAs and the D. mccartyi strains CG1, CG4, and CG5 (UBA5846/CG1, UBA5818/CG4, UBA5545/CG5, and UBA5554/CG5). It is notable that these four UBA genomes were assembled from metagenomic data from PCE-fed mixed Dehalococcoides culture CG5 (UBA5545; SRA SRX392471) and PCB-fed mixed Dehalococcoides cultures CG1 (UBA5846; SRA SRX392467), CG4 (UBA5818; SRA SRR1050519), and CG5 (UBA5554; SRA SRX392470). D. mccartyi strains CG1, CG4, and CG5 were subsequently isolated from the enrichment cultures described in the metagenomic sequencing projects SRX392471, SRX392467, SRR1050519, and SRX392470 (5, 21). Considering the origin of the reads used to obtain the genome assemblies of UBA5545, UBA5846, UBA5818, and UBA5554, it is likely that the metagenome assembled genomes described by Park et al. represent incomplete assembly of the genomes of D. mccartyi strains CG1, CG4, and CG5, which have been isolated and sequenced individually (5).
The direct linkage between these four UBAs and CG1, CG4, and CG5 is reflected in the high degree of similarity in the genomes (ANI = 99.8 to 100%; DDH = 99.7 to 100.0%) and is likely responsible for the identity between the BNR sequences in these genomes. The BNR identity in these genomes also suggests that the BNR sequences of strains CG1, CG4, and CG5 remained consistent throughout the lengthy enrichment and isolation process, representing at least hundreds of generations. The other Dehalococcoides genomes containing identical BNR amino acid sequences were those of KBTCE2/KBTCE3 and KBDCA1/KBDCA2 (Fig. 1), and it is notable that these pairs of strains emerged from common ancestors, KBTCE and KBDCA, respectively, during prolonged laboratory cultivation (19). An uncommonly high degree of genomic similarity between strains KBTCE2/KBTCE3 (ANI = 99.99; DDH = 99.7 to 99.9%) and strains KBDCA1/KBDCA2 (ANI = 99.96; DDH = 99.7 to 99.9%) is also indicated by the presence of identical numbers and types of rdhA in these pairs of genomes. The number of nonredundant rdhA sequences on Dehalococcoides genomes is variable, so the presence of identical rdhA sequences suggests recent evolutionary divergence (19, 28). Furthermore, the identical BNR sequences in these pairs of strains suggest that BNR is more stable within the genome than some rdh. The other two pairs of identical BNR sequences were between strains SG1/11a5 and strains KS/RC (29–31). Notably, each of these pairs of strains originates from single, but different laboratories.
The high degree of sequence dissimilarity and the apparent novelty of BNR in Dehalococcoides genomes make it a practical marker for monitoring and identification of specific Dehalococcoides strains. As a genetic marker, BNR can provide detailed information about functional populations during enrichment of environmental samples by closely monitoring the variation of dominant Dehalococcoides populations, which could help explain variability in dehalogenation activity during in situ bioremediation at contaminated sites. BNR-based molecular tools could be used to correlate specific dehalogenation activity with strain identity in heterogenous microbial communities, which would be particularly beneficial in environments where no functionally characterized rdhA are detected despite indications of Dehalococcoides-mediated dehalogenation.
Dehalococcoides are widely distributed in the environment and do not appear to be particularly dominant in microbial communities associated with soils and sediments contaminated with halogenated compounds (32). Members of the genus Dehalococcoides dehalogenate a variety of environmental halogenated pollutants and are widely considered to be excellent candidates for bioremediation of contaminated sites (33). Yet the range of Dehalococcoides strains identified in enrichment cultures has been limited by the high degree of identity among Dehalococcoides 16S rRNA genes and the low abundance of Dehalococcoides in environmental microbial communities (14, 34, 35). The BNR probes developed in the current study suggest that the diversity of Dehalococcoides populations is far greater than has been previously recognized. Indeed, the diversity of Dehalococcoides detected in our environmental samples using BNR2246F-2445R may be an underestimate, as these primers target a portion of the BNR sequence that has lower resolution than the full-length sequence. Dehalococcoides genomes are known to harbor a larger number and greater diversity of rdhAs than other organohalide-respiring bacteria, but most of the hundreds of distinct rdhA sequences identified in Dehalococcoides genomes remain functionally uncharacterised (19). Our analysis detected several BNR ASVs that could be positively identified as specific Dehalococcoides populations in environmental soil samples, but a much larger number of BNR ASVs that could not be classified as any known Dehalococcoides lineage.
In summary, we developed a computational approach to expedite screening of potential genetic markers among phylogenetically affiliated bacteria, which can be used in the development of technologies seeking to exploit the metabolic or physiological characteristics of specific members of bacterial genera. Using this approach, a gene encoding a BNR-containing protein of unknown function was selected and evaluated as a genetic marker to differentiate strains of Dehalococcoides, an environmentally relevant genus of bacteria whose members can transform and detoxify a range of halogenated organic solvents and persistent organic pollutants. Primers targeting BNR could differentiate individual Dehalococcoides strains, which are not easily distinguished in complex microbial communities using existing phylogenetic genetic markers, and were used to putatively link different populations with specific dehalogenation activity in synthetic and environmental microbial communities. Moreover, many phylogenetically distinct, currently uncharacterised Dehalococcoides were detected in samples from contaminated sites, suggesting that a meaningful degree of phylogenetic diversity in this genus remains undescribed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS Pangenome analysis. A Dehalococcoides pangenome was constructed from 26 complete Dehalococcoides genomes available in GenBank (accessed August 2020; Table S1); draft genomes were excluded from the pangenome. A cluster analysis of amino acid sequences was conducted using the Bacterial Pan Genome Analysis Tool using default parameters and recommended settings; orthologous clustering of functional proteins was performed against the COG and KEGG reference databases (36), yielding the profile, sequence, and functional analysis of the pangenome.
Calculation of core gene average identities. The amino acid sequences of core genes, defined as those present in all Dehalococcoides genomes in the pangenome, were aggregated into a single worksheet for use as the input for a custom R script (see supplemental material). Amino acid sequences were used in the initial screen rather than nucleotide sequences to reduce computational load and to limit the effects of third codon wobble on the average similarity calculation. Pairwise identity of the amino acid sequences encoded by the core genes in each Dehalococcoides genome was calculated with parSeqSim, a part of the protr package (37) in R v.3.6.0. A 26 × 26 similarity matrix, representing the pairwise identity of each core gene in all input genomes, was constructed and the average similarity for each core gene was calculated. The total number of pairs of identical core gene amino acid sequences and the average similarity of the sequences comprising each core group were calculated in R (Table S2). Core genes were rank-ordered by average similarity and number of 100% identical sequences to identify the most likely targets for genetic marker development. Candidate genetic markers were screened based on selection criteria described in the Results section “Identification and selection of Dehalococcoides genetic markers.”
Maximum likelihood dendrograms were constructed with MEGA X (38) to describe the phylogenetic relationships between candidate genetic markers. Full-length and/or partial nucleotide and amino acid sequences of candidates were aligned using ClustalW and the final trees are supported by 1,000 bootstraps. Amino acid and nucleotide sequences of representative genetic markers currently used to detect Dehalococcoides were aligned with ClustalOmega (39) to determine average identity and number of identical pairs (Table S3).
Primer design. Primers targeting candidate genetic markers were designed using Primer3 (Table 2). Primer specificity, sensitivity, and ability to differentiate Dehalococcoides strains were evaluated in silico using Geneious 9 (40) and in vitro. Primer specificity was assayed in vitro by PCR using template DNA from 10 representative D. mccartyi isolates available to our research facility (i.e., CG1, CG5, JNA, 11a, 11a5, 11G, ANAS2, DG, MB, and GEO12 [5, 41–47]) as positive controls, and four environmental samples known to contain no Dehalococcoides populations, including a Dehalogenimonas-containing enrichment culture, were used as negative controls.
Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was used to evaluate both the specificity and sensitivity of the primers. qPCR was performed on an ABI 7500 Fast System using the SYBR Green reporter (SensiFAST SYBR Lo-ROX Kit; Bioline, London, United Kingdom), with a DNA mixture constructed from multiple D. mccartyi isolates and a Dehalogenimonas-containing enrichment culture used as templates. Standard curve quantification of target sequences was performed using plasmids carrying the target amplicon constructed using the pGEM-T vector system (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and extracted (QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit, Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany) as previously described (48). For qPCR, the thermocycler program was initiated for 3 min at 95°C, followed by 40 cycles of 15 s at 94°C, 30 s at 60°C, and finally 30 s at 72°C. Calibration curves were established using serial dilutions of known plasmid DNA concentrations ranging from 100 to 109. The limit of blank (LOB) and standard deviation of blank (σB) were calculated from 10 reactions using nontarget DNA as the template. The limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) were calculated as σ
and σ , respectively. PCR-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) was conducted to assess the ability of primers to differentiate multiple Dehalococcoides isolates. A mixture of DNA derived from multiple D. mccartyi isolates was used as the template for PCR using the primers developed in this study, the Dehalococcoides-specific primer pair 1FGC-259R which is commonly used to identify Dehalococcoides, or the universal bacterial primer pair 341FGC-518R. PCR for DGGE was performed with a touch-down thermal program as previously described; amplicons were separated by DGGE using a denaturing gradient ranging from 30% to 55% for 12 h at 120 V and 60°C (49).
Diversity of Dehalococcoides strains in environmental samples. Environmental samples were collected from anoxic zones at e-waste recycling sites in Asia. DNA was extracted using the Qiagen DNeasy PowerSoil Kit (Qiagen GmbH). The relative abundance of Dehalococcoides in each environmental sample was determined by qPCR using the primer pairs Dhc1200F-Dhc1271R and 338F-518R to enumerate Dehalococcoides and total bacteria, respectively; quantification was performed using a standard curve with plasmids carrying target genes constructed as described above.
The diversity of Dehalococcoides populations in selected environmental samples was elucidated by paired-end sequencing of PCR amplicons (Illumina MiSeq; Novogene, Singapore) using primers targeting a 199-bp region in the BNR sequence (BNR2246F-2445R). DNA was extracted from 22 environmental samples and amplified by nested PCR (primers BNR658F-2979R followed by BNR2246F-2445R), because endpoint PCR using BNR2246F-2445R alone failed to yield sufficient DNA for sequencing.
Microbial community analysis was performed with QIIME2 v.2021.4.0 (50). Adapters were removed from demultiplexed sequences via the qiime2 cutadapt plugin before quality filtering and denoising with DADA2 (via q2-DADA2) using default parameters, except that pooled chimera detection and removal were used. The feature table was filtered to exclude singletons and features present in only one sample; the final table comprised 5,260,488 reads (97.6% of input raw reads) in 109 features.
A bespoke naive Bayes sklearn classifier was constructed and evaluated using the RESCRIPt plugin in QIIME2 (51). The classifier was trained against a purpose-built database comprising the 2246-to-2445 region of 40 BNR sequences. The target region of each sequence in the taxonomy was extracted and the trimmed sequences were aligned and dereplicated before classifier training. The classifier was evaluated using different classification methods (BLAST, sklearn, and VSEARCH) and the classification method that assigned labels to the greatest proportion of features at the highest taxonomic depth (strain-level) was selected.