https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2022.127013
Title: Multiplex SYBR Green real-time PCR for Lactobacillus acidophilus group species targeting biomarker genes revealed by a pangenome approach
Abstract: The Lactobacillus acidophilus group consists of seven closely related species. Among these,
Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus help maintain gut health and are used as a starter for fermented food. However, these species are difficult to differentiate using conventional methods due to the high similarity between the 16S rRNA and housekeeping genes. Thus, in this study, we selected biomarker genes to identify and discriminate the three species via pangenome analysis, and a multiplex SYBR Green real-time PCR that can be detected simultaneously in a single tube was developed. Pangenome analysis revealed three specific target genes: mucus-binding protein precursor to detect
Lb. acidophilus , an amino acid ABC superfamily ATP binding cassette transporter carrier protein to detect
Lb. gallinarum , and selenocysteine lyase to detect Lb. helveticus . The specificity was robustly verified using 26
Lb. acidophilus group strains and 62 other strains. The detection limits were 10 1 colony-forming units (CFU)/ml in pure culture. As per our findings, the developed method satisfactorily monitored
Lb. acidophilus group species in probiotic and dairy products. This result suggests that real-time PCR based on specific targets provides a promising approach for the rapid, accurate, and sensitive identification of these three species.
Introduction The Lactobacillus acidophilus group species consists of Lb. johnsonii , Lb. gallinarum , Lb. amylovorus , Lb. crispatus , Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gasseri , and Lb. helveticus ( Roy et al., 2000; Zheng et al., 2020 ). Among them, Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus are the dominant species in the intestines of healthy individuals due to their high survival rate in the human intestine, as lactic acid bacteria are mainly used as starters for dairy products and applied as probiotics ( Askelson et al., 2014; Griffiths and Tellez, 2013; Mayrhofer et al., 2008 ). Additionally, these species help treat acute infectious diarrhea, inflammatory bowel disease, and irritable bowel syndrome ( Guandalini, 2011; Messaoudi et al., 2011; Neveling and Dicks, 2021 ).
Previous studies have shown that numerous commercial probiotics have limited species-level taxonomic resolution using conventional methods for species or that strains are mislabeled due to inadequate identification ( Patro et al., 2016 ). In particular, identifying and classifying strains by morphological and biochemical methods have been challenging, as the phenotypic properties between Lb. acidophilus group species are similar ( You and Kim, 2020 ). The 16S rRNA gene is the usual gene used as a marker to identify bacteria ( Yu et al., 2012 ). Although six L . acidophilus species are regarded as separate species, they are closely related ( Holzapfel et al., 2001 ). Lb. acidophilus group species, especially Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus , have high sequence similarity of the 16S rRNA gene (>98.35% similarity) ( You and Kim, 2020 ). To obtain higher accuracy than the 16S rRNA gene, housekeeping genes, such as rpoA , pheS , atpA , slp , groEL , and tuf , are often used as genetic markers to differentiate Lb. acidophilus group ( Naser et al., 2006; Podleśny et al., 2011 ). However, these genes had high similarities with each species, thus requiring additional experiments to distinguish them accurately.
Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) has increasingly been used to determine bacterial genetic relationships at the genome level ( Mellmann et al., 2017 ). Recently, pangenome analysis based on WGSs has been applied to distinguish closely related species ( E. Kim et al., 2021 ; Kim et al., 2020a ). Although molecular detection methods, such as multilocus sequence typing and conventional PCR, targeting genes obtained from whole-genome sequencing showed higher accuracy than the method based on the 16S rRNA gene, these methods are still time-consuming and labor-intensive ( Fan et al., 2007; Li et al., 2017 ). In contrast, multiplex real-time PCR is preferred over various PCR assays because it is detectable in a single reaction and is faster and less expensive to identify bacteria ( Alía et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2017 ). Some researchers used multiplex SYBR Green real-time PCR to rapidly detect pathogenic bacteria and viruses ( Komalasari et al., 2020; KrishnanNair Geetha et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2020 ). However, the real-time multiplex PCR method for identifying three closely related species, Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus , has not yet been developed. In this study, biomarker genes for Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus , which are closely related species and are mainly used for probiotic applications, were selected via pangenome analysis. Additionally, a multiplex SYBR Green real-time PCR targeting biomarker genes was developed to rapidly and cost-effectively detect three species in a single tube.
Materials and methods Pangenome analysis The genome sequences of Lb. acidophilus group species were obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (accessed on July 13, 2021). In total, 68 genome sequences, including 8 Lb. acidophilus , 19 Lb. helveticus , 8 Lb. gallinarum , 6 Lb. amylovorus , 7 Lb. crispatus , 6 Lb. gasseri , and 14 Lb. johnsonii , were used to explore these specific genes ( Table S1 ). The pangenome analysis of Lb. acidophilus group species was conducted by Anvi’o software version 6.0 according to the pangenomics of the microbial method ( Eren et al., 2015 ). The specific genes for each species of Lb. acidophilus group were extracted using the bacterial pan genome analysis pipeline v.1.3 ( Chaudhari et al., 2016 ). The database of the core genome for each species was constructed with a 50% identity cutoff by default, and specific genes were extracted by comparing the extracted core genomes. The extracted genes were confirmed to not be present in other bacterial genomes through the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) and were unique to each species. The primers targeting unique genes were designed using the Primer-BLAST program with default settings ( Ye et al., 2012 ).
Bacterial strains and DNA extraction In total, 88 lactic acid bacterial strains were used for this study ( Table 1 ). These strains were obtained from the Korean Agricultural Culture Collection (KACC, Jeonju, South Korea), the Korean Collection for Type Cultures (KCTC, Daejeon, South Korea), and Laboratory Isolates (LI, Yongin, South Korea) ( Table 1 ). Bifidobacterium species were grown in Bifidobacterium agar (MB cell, Seoul, South Korea). Other genera, such as Lactobacillus , Lactococcus , and Enterococcus, were grown in Lactobacilli MRS agar (Difco, Becton & Dickinson, Sparks, MD, USA). All strains were cultured at 37 °C for 48 h under anaerobic conditions. To extract genomic DNA, bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation at 13,600 × g for 10 min. Harvested cells were used to extract genomic DNA. Genomic DNA of all reference and isolated strains was extracted using a DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions for Gram-positive bacteria. The purity and concentration of genomic DNA were measured via absorbance using a MaestroNano® spectrophotometer (Maestrogen, Las Vegas, NV, USA).
Multiplex real-time PCR conditions The multiplex real-time PCR assay was performed in a 7500 fast real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). To optimize the concentration of primers, different concentrations ranging from 50 to 1000 nM were tested. The optimized concentration was the primer concentration that produced the lowest Ct value without generating unspecified peaks in the melting curve ( Komalasari et al., 2020 ). The mixture consisted of 10 µL 2 × Thunderbird SYBR qPCR master mix (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan), 20 ng genomic DNA, the optimized concentration of each species-specific primer pair ( Table 2 ), and distilled water to fill 20 µL. Real-time PCR conditions of target amplification consisted of an initial step at 95 °C for 2 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95 °C for 5 s and 60 °C for 30 s. Melting curves were analyzed using one cycle at 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 1 min, 95 °C for 30 s, and 60 °C for 15 s. The measurements were analyzed via 7500 fast software v.2.3 (Applied Biosystems).
Specificity and sensitivity The specificity of the designed primers was confirmed using a single real-time PCR to ensure that the amplicon yielded the expected T m values. For the specificity test, 26 Lb. acidophilus group strains, 15 nontarget Lb. acidophilus group strains, and 47 other lactic acid bacterial strains belonging to 36 genera were used. The amplicon sequences were analyzed to confirm that they corresponded to selected targets. Briefly, the amplicons obtained by real-time PCR were purified using a QIAquick purification kit (Qiagen) and sequenced using a DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems). The amplicon sequences were queried against the GenBank database by BLASTN.
According to previous studies, standard curves for quantification were generated ( Gómez-Rojo et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2020a ). Briefly, three reference strains at 10 1 –10 8 CFU/ml as determined by cell counting on MRS agar (Difco) were subjected to genomic DNA extraction. The standard curve was constructed by plotting the Ct value obtained against the number of cells per reaction. In addition, the sensitivity of the multiplex real-time PCR was confirmed using ternary mixture samples.
Verification of the multiplex real-time PCR assay To validate the multiplex real-time PCR, detection of artificially contaminated samples was performed according to a previous study ( He et al., 2017 ). Milk samples purchased from a local market in Korea were used for spiking experiments. The absence of three species in the milk sample was confirmed by multiplex real-time PCR prior to inspection. Artificially contaminated samples were prepared by placing 25 ml of milk sample into a sterile bag and inoculated with a cocktail of Lb . acidophilus , Lb . gallinarum , and Lb . helveticus at a concentration of 10 1 –10 8 CFU/ml each. DNA was extracted from artificially contaminated samples and applied to multiplex real-time PCR.
The developed multiplex real-time PCR assay was verified using probiotic and dairy products. Probiotic and dairy products were obtained from markets in South Korea, the USA, Canada, and Denmark. These products declared Lb. acidophilus group species included 23 (capsule), 10 (powder), 5 (liquid), and 1 (chewable product). Total genomic DNA from probiotic and dairy products was extracted using a DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit (Qiagen) with the Gram-positive bacteria DNA extraction protocol ( Desfossés-Foucault et al., 2012 ; M. J. Kim et al., 2021 ). The lysis buffer of the DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (Qiagen) was added to the probiotic and dairy products, and the total genomic DNA of the products was extracted according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Multiplex real-time PCR was conducted with the same conditions as indicated in the “2.3. Multiplex real-time PCR conditions” section. The species detected were compared to the label claims.
Statistical analysis Statistical analysis of values of melting temperature peaks was performed using analysis of variance and Duncan’s multiple range test, and statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05.
Results and discussion Pangenome analysis and exploration of species-specific genes This study performed a pangenome analysis of whole-genome sequences to explore target genes specific to three closely related Lb. acidophilus group species found mainly in food samples. The phylogenetic tree was constructed using the pangenome of 8 Lb. acidophilus , 8 Lb. gallinarum , 19 Lb. helveticus , and 33 nontarget Lb. acidophilus group species, such as Lb. amylovorus , Lb. crispatus , Lb. gasseri , and Lb. johnsonii . Most genomes were grouped according to species, and Lb. acidophilus group species are grouped into three major clades ( Fig. 1 ). The first clade contained Lb. gasseri and Lb. johnsonii . The second clade contained Lb. helveticus and Lb. acidophilus . The third clade contained Lb. crispatus , Lb. amylovorus , and Lb. gallinarum . However, the Lb. gallinarum HFD4 genome was grouped into a clade with the Lb. helveticus genome. Similarly, the Lb. gallinarum HFD4 strain shared a higher percentage of ANI values with Lb. helveticus than Lb. gallinarum , suggesting that the HFD4 strain was incorrectly classified as Lb. gallinarum . This strain was also classified incorrectly in a previous study ( Kim et al., 2020b ).
Of the 8654 orthologous proteins, the Lb. acidophilus group core genome comprised 487 genes (on average 26.91% of each genome), with the accessory genome containing 5290 genes. In total, 8 Lb. acidophilus strains had 1433 core genes, and 7 Lb. gallinarum (excluding the misclassified genome) and 19 Lb. helveticus strains contained 1320 and 898 core genes, respectively. Subsequently, comparing the core gene of each species, 292, 151, and 36 unique genes were extracted for Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus , respectively. All unique genes confirmed that the genes were unique to other lactic acid bacterial strains. Excluding the genes present in different species, such as Lb. delbrueckii , Lb. kefiranofaciens , Lb. reuteri , and Pediococcus pentosaceus , genes specific to Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus were identified as mucus-binding protein precursor MUB (accession no. AAV43521.1 ), amino acid ABC superfamily ATP binding cassette transporter carrier protein (accession no. KRL24051.1 ), and selenocysteine lyase (accession no. ABX26789.1 ), respectively.
The MUB protein is defined as an effector involved in the mechanism by which lactic acid bacteria, which are important symbiotic bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract, attach to the host and are mainly found in lactobacilli in the intestine ( van Tassell and Miller, 2011 ). ABC transporter protein transports numerous hydrophobic compounds and metabolites through various substrates and extracellular and intracellular membranes via lipid membranes ( Dean and Annilo, 2005 ). Selenium is a nonmetallic trace element involved in redox reactions and is used to produce selenocysteine, an amino acid that is identified as an essential part of selenoproteins. Selenocysteine lyase is an enzyme that is used to synthesize new selenoproteins by degrading Sec into selenium and alanine to release selenide ( Watanabe et al., 2020 ). These genes are conserved in the three species but show differences in sequence.
Optimization of multiplex real-time PCR Optimization was performed to determine the optimal primer concentration for multiplex real-time PCR. The optimal primer concentrations, which provided the lowest Ct values at the highest fluorescence signal without generating a nonspecific peak in the melting curve of the three species, were selected for further analysis. The optimal primer concentrations for target genes were 1000 nM, 50 nM, and 100 nM for the primers of Lb . acidophilus , Lb . gallinarum , and Lb . helveticus , respectively ( Table 2 ).
Specificity-specific primers Real-time PCR takes less time, has less cross-contamination and is more specific and sensitive than gel-based PCR analysis. Additionally, multiplex real-time PCR is preferred over various PCR assays because it is detectable in a single reaction and is faster and less expensive to analyze the identification of bacteria ( Alía et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2017 ). Multiplex real-time PCR technology has been extensively used for the rapid detection of pathogens. SYBR Green-based multiplex real-time PCR, which provides an approach to identify target genes independently in a single reaction through melting temperature analysis, is less expensive than the probe-based method ( Yang and Rui, 2016 ). Therefore, we developed a multiplex SYBR Green real-time PCR targeting specific genes to rapidly and efficiently detect Lb. acidophilus group species.
The specificity of multiplex real-time PCR was tested on genomic DNA obtained from the 26 reference and isolated strains of the target Lb. acidophilus group and 62 nontarget Lb. acidophilus group strains and other lactic acid bacterial strains. As a result of performing real-time PCR on 26 strains, 12 strains were amplified with Lb . acidophilus , 1 with Lb . gallinarum , and 13 strains with Lb . helveticus ( Fig. 2 ). None of the primers showed any amplification for the 62 nontarget strains. The amplicon sequences for Lb . acidophilus , Lb . gallinarum , and Lb . helveticus were identified as Lb . acidophilus strain LA-G80-111 (accession no. CP054559.1 ), Lb . gallinarum An101 contig 31 (accession no. NFLZ01000031.1), and Lb . helveticus LZ-R-5 (accession no. CP045642.1 ), respectively.
The results of target amplicons obtained after multiplex real-time PCR with melting curve analysis for the simultaneous detection of triple targets of Lb. acidophilus group species are provided in Fig. 3 . The melting peak analysis observed only three melting temperature peaks that were distinct from each representative target strain without peaks of nonspecific products. The melting temperature peaks were significantly different as follows: Lb. acidophilus 76.1 °C ± 0.5 °C, Lb. gallinarum 79.0 °C ± 0.5 °C, and Lb. helveticus 82.6 °C ± 0.5 °C. The results showed that the developed multiplex real-time PCR can detect the three Lb. acidophilus group species in a single reaction tube.
Sensitivity specific primers Standard curves were constructed for each primer designed for amplification of three target genes. The standard curves were generated using Lb. acidophilus group species at 10 1 –10 8 CFU/ml ( Fig. 4 ). The amplicon efficiencies for the primers of Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus were 98.29%, 93.82%, and 91.01%, respectively. The R 2 coefficients were 0.994, 0.995, and 0.998, respectively ( Fig. 4 ). The amplicon efficiency and R 2 values were within the recommended ranges reported in a previous study ( Broeders et al., 2014 ). Moreover, sensitivity for the multiplex real-time PCR was performed with different amounts of each target species. A minimum of 10 1 CFU/ml for Lb . acidophilus , Lb . gallinarum , and Lb . helveticus showed a detectable level of positive amplification ( Fig. 5 ). Good linear correlations were shown between Ct values and the number of cells per reaction.
The limit of detection (LOD) is defined as the minimum quantity of CFUs detectable in a single reaction ( Gómez-Rojo et al., 2015 ). The LOD for the multiplex real-time PCR was established as the quantity of template with respect to the standard curve, corresponding to the lowest dilution in which the multiplex real-time PCR signal was observed for tested samples according to a previous method ( Gómez-Rojo et al., 2015 ). The LOD for the multiplex real-time PCR performed with pure culture cells of three species was established as 10 1 CFU/ml, with a mean Ct value of 34.54. The limit of quantification (LOQ) is the minimum quantity of target CFUs that can be quantified. The LOQ value was also calculated according to a previous method ( Gómez-Rojo et al., 2015 ). Similar to the LOD, the LOQ for the multiplex real-time PCR was established as 10 1 CFU/ml with a confidence interval ( p < 0.05) between Ct values of 34.09–34.89, indicating the minimum quantity of CFU for which the confidence interval does not overlap with that for the following dilution on the calibration curve. Therefore, the multiplex real-time PCR developed in this study is a highly species-specific detection and sensitivity assay.
Application of multiplex real-time PCR The validation of multiplex real-time PCR was performed by artificially contaminating three Lb . acidophilus group species into milk. For artificially contaminated samples, three species could be detected even though the milk sample was contaminated with the lowest level (10 1 CFU/ml) of the target species ( Fig. 5 ).
The 31 commercial probiotic and dairy products labeled Lb. acidophilus group species were used to verify the developed multiplex real-time PCR. The species detected by real-time PCR were compared with the strains indicated on the label claim. As a result, 28 probiotic and dairy products were found to match their label claims ( Table 3 ). Of these, 26 products were labeled Lb. acidophilus or Lb. helveticus , and one melting curve corresponding to each species was detected in all of these products. The remaining two products (PRO4 and PRO8) declared Lb. acidophilus and Lb. helveticus were simultaneously detected by two species in a single reaction tube. Unlike the 28 products that matched the label claim, the two products had species that were not declared on the label. These two products (PRO1 and PRO12) displayed Lb. acidophilus on the label claim, but Lb. helveticus was detected instead of Lb. acidophilus . These mislabeled products were verified by a previously reported method ( M.J. Kim et al., 2021 ). Real-time PCR products amplified by each primer were sequenced. Sequences were then analyzed against the GenBank database by BLASTN. The amplicons of PRO1 and PRO12 samples were identified as Lb . helveticus strain LH5 with 100% identity. Patro et al. (2016) monitored probiotic products by metagenome sequencing and reported that two of the ten products did not match the label claim, and one product-labeled Lb. acidophilus was identified as Lb. helveticus ( Patro et al., 2016 ). Moreover, 22 of the 52 probiotic products showed inconsistent results with the label claim by high-throughput sequencing, and three of them were labeled Lb. acidophilus but were identified as Lb. helveticus ( Morovic et al., 2016 ). In the case of one product (PRO31) labeled as lactic acid bacteria, multiplex real-time PCR found that Lb. helveticus was contained in this product. Our method developed in this study could rapidly detect and quantify Lb. acidophilus group species contained in commercial probiotic and dairy products.
Conclusions Conclusively, specific genes obtained from the pangenome analysis accurately discriminated Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus . A multiplex real-time PCR using SYBR Green was optimized to distinguish three species in a single tube. The developed method was verified using probiotics and dairy products. The LOD and LOQ for multiplex real-time PCR was established in 10 1 CFU/ml. This method qualitatively and quantitatively detected the Lb. acidophilus group in the products at the species level. Moreover, this method could detect mislabeled products. Therefore, our approach can accurately identify Lb. acidophilus , Lb. gallinarum , and Lb. helveticus and determine species nomenclature. Additionally, this method can contribute to conveying accurate information by labeling the correct strain name on products that use probiotics.
Supporting information Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.micres.2022.127013 .