https://doi.org/10.1128/msystems.00228-22
(Meta)Genomic Analysis Reveals Diverse Energy Conservation Strategies Employed by Globally Distributed Gemmatimonadota
ABSTRACT Gemmatimonadota is a phylum-level lineage distributed widely but rarely reported. Only six representatives of Gemmatimonadota have so far been isolated and cultured in laboratory. The physiology, ecology, and evolutionary history of this phylum remain unknown. The 16S rRNA gene survey of our salt lake and deep-sea sediments, and Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) samples, reveals that Gemmatimonadota exist in diverse environments globally. In this study, we retrieved 17 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) from salt lake sediments (12 MAGs) and deep-sea sediments (5 MAGs). Analysis of these MAGs and the nonredundant MAGs or genomes from public databases reveals Gemmatimonadota can degrade various complex organic substrates, and mainly employ heterotrophic pathways (e.g., glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid [TCA] cycle) for growth via aerobic respiration. And the processes of sufficient energy being stored in glucose through gluconeogenesis, followed by the synthesis of more complex compounds, are prevalent in Gemmatimonadota. A highly expandable pangenome for Gemmatimonadota has been observed, which presumably results from their adaptation to thriving in diverse environments. The enrichment of the Na+/H+ antiporter in the SG8-23 order represents their adaptation to salty habitats. Notably, we identified a novel lineage of the SG8-23 order, which is potentially anoxygenic phototrophic. This lineage is not closely related to the phototrophs in the order of Gemmatimonadales. The two orders differ distinctly in the gene organization and phylogenetic relationship of their photosynthesis gene clusters, indicating photosystems in Gemmatimonadota have evolved in two independent routes.
IMPORTANCE The phylum Gemmatimonadota is widely distributed in various environments. However, their physiology, ecology and evolutionary history remain unknown, primary due to the limited cultured isolates and available genomes. We were intrigued to find out how widespread this phylum is, and how it can thrive under diverse conditions. Our results here expand the knowledge of the genetic and metabolic diversity of Gemmatimonadota, and shed light on the diverse energy conservation strategies (i.e., oxidative phosphorylation, substrate phosphorylation, and photosynthetic phosphorylation) responsible for their global distribution. Moreover, gene organization and phylogenetic analysis of photosynthesis gene clusters in Gemmatimonadota provide a valuable insight into the evolutionary history of photosynthesis.
INTRODUCTION Bacteria of the phylum Gemmatimonadota (formerly Gemmatimonadetes [1], KS-B division [2], or BD group [3]) are abundant (0.2 to 6.5% of the total bacterial population by 16S rRNA gene counts) in various habitats, such as waste water, agricultural soil, fresh water, and forest soil (4–9). The Gemmatimonadota phylum comprises five groups at the class level (groups 1–5) according to 16S rRNA gene sequence surveys (10, 11). Only six strains belonging to this phylum have been cultivated and characterized to date, and they are Gemmatimonas aurantiaca T-27 (1), Gemmatirosa kalamazoonesis KBS708 (12), Gemmatimonas phototrophica AP64 (13), Longimicrobium terrae CB-286315 (14), Roseisolibacter agri AW1220 (11), and Gemmatimonas groenlandica TET16 (15). All of these strains except L. terrae CB-286315 belong to the class Gemmatimonadetes (group 1). L. terrae CB-286315 is affiliated with the class Longimicrobia (group 3). No isolates or metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) belonging to the other three classes (groups 2, 4, and 5) have been reported. Although Gemmatimonadota are generally believed to play significant roles in biogeochemical cycles (13, 16–20), very little is known about this group of organisms.
In this study, we obtained 12 and 5 high-quality Gemmatimonadota MAGs from the Qinghai Lake sediments and the South Indian Ocean sediments, respectively, and examined the genetic and metabolic diversity of these MAGs, along with the genomes and MAGs of Gemmatimonadota from the public databases. Gemmatimonadota have evolved diverse modes of energy conservation, including aerobic respiration, fermentation, and anoxygenic photosynthesis, in agreement with their widespread presence. We identified a novel phototrophic lineage (SG8-23 order), which is closely related to neither G. groenlandica TET16 nor G. phototrophica AP64, the only two known phototrophic Gemmatimonadota isolates in the Gemmatimonadales order (13, 15, 21, 22). The two orders differ distinctly in the gene organization of their photosynthesis gene clusters (PGCs). Phylogenetic analysis based on bacteriochlorophyll biosynthesis genes (acsF and bchH) and photosynthetic reaction center subunits (pufL and pufM), shed significant light on the two independent evolutionary routes of photosynthesis in Gemmatimonadota.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Biogeography of Gemmatimonadota. A total of 0.7 billion paired-end (PE) raw sequencing reads (~170 Gb) from the three Qinghai Lake sediment samples were obtained (Data Set S1, Sheet 1 in the supplemental material). Initial assembly with SPAdes produced contigs (≥1,000 bp) of 1.86, 1.89, and 1.92 Gb in total length for N1, N4, and N5, respectively (Data Set S1, Sheet 1). A total of 122,010 16S rRNA gene tags were extracted from these metagenomes (16S mitags), and 15,924 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were obtained by clustering the 16S mitags against the SILVA database. By taxonomic assignment based on the SILVA taxonomy, the obtained OTUs belong to at least 33 phyla. Bacteria dominated the microbial community with a relative abundance of 92.15–93.58%, with Proteobacteria (20.71–26.78%) and Chloroflexi (12.31–16.78%) being the top two most abundant phyla (Fig. 1A and Data Set S2, Sheet 1). Notably, the relative abundance of phylum Gemmatimonadota was about 1.55–1.79%, and is similar to that in the deep-sea sediments (1.15–4.39%) of the Southwest Indian Ocean (23).
To learn more about the global distribution of Gemmatimonadota, we retrieved 23,323 qualified samples from the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP). Over 64% (15,058) of these samples contain species belonging to Gemmatimonadota, and they are distributed around the globe in a variety of habitats, such as tundra, cropland, lakes, marine, and the human gut (Fig. 1B and Data Set S2, Sheet 2). The abundance of Gemmatimonadota varies considerably among the habitats and among samples from the same habitat. This phylum appears more abundant in tundra and permafrost, with the highest abundance of ~1/3 detected in a tundra biome, than in fresh water and marine waters (Data Set S2, Sheet 2). The median abundances of Gemmatimonadota are 1.85, 0.73, 0.61, 0.019, and 0.003% in samples from terrestrial soil (mostly in the permafrost zone), freshwater sediment, marine sediment, fresh water, and marine water, respectively (Fig. 1C). Gemmatimonadota has also been detected in trace amounts in host-associated environments such as rhizosphere, biofilm, sebum, saliva, mucus, and feces.
Genome-based taxonomic analysis of Gemmatimonadota. We assembled 12 Gemmatimonadota MAGs (≥75% completeness and ≤5% contamination) from the metagenomic DNA of Qinghai Lake sediments (Data Set S1, Sheet 2). Five additional MAGs were obtained from the metagenomes of deep-sea sediment samples taken from the Southwestern Indian Ocean (23). To facilitate the phylogenetic analysis of phylum Gemmatimonadota, we downloaded 504 medium- to high-quality Gemmatimonadota genomes and MAGs (≥50% completeness and ≤5% contamination) from the NCBI, GTDB, and Figshare databases (Table S1). After deduplication and quality control, 326 nonredundant genomes at strain levels (>99% ANI) were retained. These genomes ranged from 1.52 to 7.47 Mb in size with a median value of 3.57 Mb, and their GC contents were between 44.92% and 74.33% with a median of 67.37% (Fig. 2 and Table S1). The large variation in estimated genome size and GC content may imply considerable diversity within phylum Gemmatimonadota. Based on genome similarity and phylogenomic analysis, these nonredundant genomes are grouped into 265 potential species after dereplication using dRep v2.3.2 (24) at 95% ANI, all of which belong to class Gemmatimonadetes (Fig. 2 and Table S1). By GTDB classification, the 326 genomes are divided into three orders, i.e., Gemmatimonadales (199 genomes), SG8-23 (111 genomes), and an unclassified order (16 genomes). We focused our comparative genomic analysis on genomes from Gemmatimonadales and SG8-23, as the majority of Gemmatimonadota genomes used in this study were affiliated with these two orders. Separation of the two orders was further demonstrated by a genome-scale gene correlation analysis (Fig. S1).
Metabolic potential of Gemmatimonadota. Pangenome analysis (Fig. S2) reveals a highly expandable pangenome for Gemmatimonadota, which has presumably resulted from their adaptation to thriving in diverse environments. However, a hypergeometric test infers no significant differences between Gemmatimonadales and SG8-23 in metabolism based on KEGG functional categories (Data Set S3, Sheet 1). Therefore, we set out to construct the metabolic potentials of the entire phylum of Gemmatimonadota by examining functional annotations of the 326 nonredundant genomes or MAGs, to illustrate an overview of energy releasing and storing processes in this phylum.
As shown in Data Set S4, Sheet 1, 129 carbohydrate-active enzyme families were observed, and members of Gemmatimonadota are potentially able to utilize a wide range of complex carbon sources, including chitin, starch, cellulose, and hemicellulose. The breakdown of glucose to pyruvate can be achieved through EMP (Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas, usually called glycolysis) or ED (Entner–Doudoroff) pathway in Gemmatimonadota, as shown in Fig. 3. Genes encoding the three key rate-limiting enzymes in glycolysis, i.e., hexokinase (glk), 6-phosphofructokinase (pfk), and pyruvate kinase (pyk), are annotated in 77–83% of the 326 genomes, and at least 184 genomes (56%) contain all three of these genes, showing glycolysis is a main process for breaking down glucose to pyruvate (Fig. 3 and Data Set S4, Sheet 2). Those MAGs without glycolysis may be due to the incompleteness of their genomes, and they may acquire pyruvate via the ED pathway as an alternative. For example, N1_bin27 is identified as having the key enzyme of 2-dehydro-3-deoxyphosphogluconate aldolase (eda) in ED pathway, indicating this MAG may obtain pyruvate without having to go through glycolysis. However, the predicted eda gene is found in only 50 Gemmatimonadales (15%) and 6 SG8-23 genomes (2%) (Data Set S4, Sheet 2), implying that the ED pathway is not commonly used for acquiring pyruvate by Gemmatimonadota. It was noticed that the pathway for the conversion of D-glucuronate and D-galacturonate into 2-Dehydro-3-deoxy-D-gluconate-6-phosphate exists in 10% of the 326 genomes (Data Set S4, Sheet 2). This process may play a role in replenishing the ED pathway with intermediate substrates, especially for those Gemmatimonadota lacking the edd gene, which encodes phosphogluconate dehydratase (Fig. 3). Genes encoding the three key rate limiting enzymes of the TCA cycle, i.e., citrate synthase (cs), aconitate hydratase (aco), and malate dehydrogenase (mdh), are annotated in most of the 326 genomes (83%, 73%, and 82% genomes, respectively), indicating that Gemmatimonadota acquire energy mainly through the TCA pathway and most likely live a heterotrophic lifestyle. Besides, 1,2-Dichlroroethane, a widely used chlorinated solvent with potential to harm the environment and human health, could also be degraded by Gemmatimonadota into glyoxylate, which can be incorporated in the TCA cycle for subsequent energy conservation (Fig. 3). This observation partially explains why some Gemmatimonadota, especially family Gemmatimonadaceae, whose genomes are enriched with benzoate and styrene degradation genes (Data Set S3, Sheet 5), are detected in contaminated environments, such as bioreactor sludge and waste water (Table S1).
The pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) provides an alternative to glycolysis for glucose oxidation (Fig. 3). Genes encoding glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD, zwf) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (PGD, gnd), two rate-limiting enzymes during the oxidative phase of PPP, are annotated in 23% and 27% of the 326 genomes, respectively. Genes for putative transketolase (tkt), transaldolase (tal), and ribulose-phosphate 3-epimerase (rpe), responsible for the conversion of phosphorylated carbohydrates in the nonoxidative phase, are present in over 80% of the Gemmatimonadota genomes. Moreover, more than half (54%) of the Gemmatimonadota genomes appear to encode ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (rpi), which catalyzes the interconversion between D-ribose-5-phosphate and D-ribulose-5-phosphate. These observations show that PPP may be a prevalent pathway in Gemmatimonadota, providing essential substrates (e.g., NADPH and pentose phosphate) for the synthesis of nucleotides, amino acids, cofactors, and vitamins. For example, vitamin B6 could be synthesized using the PPP product of the D-ribose-5-phosphate or D-erythrose-4-phosphate via two non-homologous routes (Fig. 3). The biologically active form of the vitamin B6 group (pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, and pyridoxine), pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (PLP), is known as an essential cofactor for cellular function in all domains of life (25). PLP-dependent enzymes have been reported as being involved in diverse cellular processes, such as the biosynthesis of amino acids, sugars, lipids, and antibiotics (25–27). However, pyridoxal 5′-phosphate synthase (pdxST), which can catalyze D-ribose-5-phosphate, D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, and l-glutamine into PLP, has been found in only two genomes, suggesting it is not the main route for vitamin B6 biosynthesis. The key enzyme of another route, pyridoxine 5-phosphate synthase (pdxJ), which can convert 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate and 3-amino-2-oxopropyl phosphate to pyridoxine-5-phosphate, are identified in over 80% of 326 genomes, showing that most of Gemmatimonadota may be capable of synthesizing PLP on their own via this route. However, erythrose-4-phosphate dehydrogenase (epd) and erythronate-4-phosphate dehydrogenase (pdxB), the first two enzymes of this route, are seldom present in Gemmatimonadota genomes. Fortunately, their functions might be replaced by other nonhomologous enzymes (28).
As for carbohydrate anabolism, almost 50% of 326 genomes (162) contain all three genes likely encoding the key enzymes of gluconeogenesis, phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (pckA), fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (fbp), and glucokinase (glk). And the proportion of genomes containing at least one of these three rate-limiting enzymes is about 73%, 76%, 79%, respectively. Therefore, the process of gluconeogenesis storing sufficient energy in glucose, followed by the synthesis of more complex compounds (e.g., glycogen and starch), should be prevalent in Gemmatimonadota (Fig. 3). Trehalose, known as a protective agent that helps cells adapting to cold and high-pressure habitats, may be synthesized by Gemmatimonadota, as has been reported previously (21). However, we found that the biosynthesis of this compound does not seem prevalent in Gemmatimonadota (Fig. 3). This is because the enzyme of 1-alpha-D-glucosylmutase (treY), responsible for the conversion of maltodextrin to the precursor of trehalose (maltooligosyltrehalose) (28), is present in less than 10% of Gemmatimonadota genomes (Data Set S4, Sheet 2). Trehalose could also be synthesized in one step using trehalose synthase (treT) from the ubiquitous metabolic intermediates of D-glucose and UDP- or ADP-glucose. Nevertheless, the treT gene is detected only in 14 genomes (Data Set S4, Sheet 2).
In addition, genes for acetyl-CoA synthetase (acs), which synthesize acetyl-CoA for energy metabolism and for the synthesis of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins, is identified in 77% of the genomes. Therefore, heterotrophy via acetate fermentation appears to occur in Gemmatimonadota. And 19 genomes are found to contain genes coding for both large and small subunits of RubisCO (rbcLS, ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase), a key enzyme for CO2 fixation in photosynthesis, indicating photoautotrophic potential in some Gemmatimonadota. However, no photoautotrophs or chemoautotrophs have so far been isolated in this phylum (15).
Characteristics of the electron transport chain in Gemmatimonadota. To gain a better insight into its energy conservation, we further characterized the ETC (electron transport chain) composition of Gemmatimonadota.
Complex I (NADH-quinone oxidoreductase) and complex II (succinate dehydrogenase), encoded by nuo and sdh, respectively, feed electrons to membrane-bound respiratory chains. Both enzymes are found in over 80% of the Gemmatimonadota genomes (Fig. 3 and Data Set S4, Sheet 2). Other quinone reductases are present in over half of the Gemmatimonadota genomes, such as proline dehydrogenase (putB), glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (glpD), and quinoprotein glucose dehydrogenase (gcd), which are involved in proline, glycerophospholipid, and carbohydrate metabolism, respectively, and are also primary points for electrons entering the respiratory chain in Gemmatimonadota. An Mrp (multiple resistance and pH) antiporter (Na+/H+ antiporter), which contains multiple subunits (MrpBCDEFG) and is responsible for the efflux of intracellular sodium ions utilizing the proton motive force across membranes, is enriched in SG8-23, as revealed by the hypergeometric test (Data Set S3, Sheets 2, 3, and 4). Since the majority of the SG8-23 genomes are retrieved from marine and saline soda habitats (Fig. 2 and Table S1), the enrichment of the Na+/H+ antiporter represents the adaptation of this group to salty habitats. It has been reported that MrpC and MrpD are homologous to membrane-embedded subunits of NuoK and NuoMN in the respiratory chain complex I (29), implying the close kinship of Na+/H+ antiporter and complex I in proton transport and energy production.
Complex III (cytochrome c reductase), also known as the bc1 complex (or b6f in photosynthetic organisms), is a key component of both the respiratory and the photosynthetic electron transport chains. Surprisingly, the cytochrome b subunit (petB) of bc1 is only found in 23% of the genomes, indicating that the bc1 complex is probably not widely used in Gemmatimonadota. Alternative complex III (ACIII), structurally unrelated to bc1, could serve the function of bc1 (30). This complex is found in various bacteria, including Gemmatimonadota (30), but is identified in fewer than 10% of the genomes in this study (Data Set S4, Sheet 2). It is possible that low similarity to known ACIII proteins in the KEGG database prevents function annotation or novel complex III subunits (or modules) exist in Gemmatimonadota (31). It is also worth noting that complex III is not essential in respiratory chains. For instance, cytochrome bd oxidase, which reduces of oxygen to water, obtains electrons directly from quinol without the aid of complex III but does not pump protons across the membrane (32, 33), thus reducing the efficiency of energy conversion into ATP.
Three types of complex IV, the last enzymatic complex for electron transfer in an aerobic respiratory chain, have been detected. They are caa3-type heme–copper oxygen reductase (HCO), cbb3-type HCO, and cytochrome bd oxidase, which exist in 74%, 50%, and 53% of the 326 genomes, respectively, indicating that Gemmatimonadota mainly use O2 as the terminal electron acceptor. Five genomes, including that of the cultured strain G. aurantiaca T-27, are found to contain all three types of complex IV. Because of the much higher affinity of cbb3-type HCOs and cytochrome bd oxidase for O2 than caa3-type HCOs (34–36), these strains may respond efficiently to variation in O2 level. On the other hand, since oxygen reductase is also found in strictly anaerobic organisms, such as Desulfovibrio desulfuricans ATCC 27774 (37), the presence of the terminal oxidases may also serve to protect oxygen-sensitive enzymes when anaerobically respiring Gemmatimonadota are exposed to oxic conditions. Moreover, genes encoding putative nitrous oxide reductase (NosZ) and nitric oxide reductase (NorBC) are present in at least 23% and 9% of the genomes (Data Set S4, Sheet 2), respectively, suggesting they may use N2O and NO as terminal electron acceptors. Nitrate and nitrite are seldom used as terminal electron acceptors in Gemmatimonadota, as nitrate reductase (NarGHI) and nitrite reductase (NrfAH) are only identified in 2–10% of the 326 genomes. Notably, at least 30% of Gemmatimonadota that may be capable of performing anaerobic respiration also possess cytochrome c oxidase or cytochrome bd oxidase (Data Set S4, Sheet 3), further demonstrating their diverse energy conservation strategies for coping with oxygen varies.
In addition, Gemmatimonadota possess a complete set of men-like genes for the synthesis of menaquinone (MK, or vitamin K2), whereas genes encoding ubiquinone (UQ, or coenzyme Q) synthesis are incomplete (Data Set S4, Sheet 2), in agreement with the finding that the major respiratory quinone of the six cultured isolates is MK-8 or MK-9 (1, 11, 12, 14, 15, 22). It is speculated that UQ, usually used by aerobic organisms, appeared about 2.5 billion years ago as a strategy of life to adapt to rising oxygen levels (38, 39). On the other hand, MK exists in microorganisms living under low O2 or anoxic conditions (32). There are two known pathways for MK synthesis in bacteria, i.e., the “classical” (Men) pathway and the “futalosine” (Mqn) pathway (40, 41). It appears that SG8-23 preferentially employs the classical pathway, as menA, menB, and menD are enriched in this order, as opposed to Gemmatimonadales (Data Set S3, Sheet 2), which prefers the futalosine pathway. It is unclear why one pathway is preferred over the other as both pathways utilize the same precursors and function under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions (41).
Organization of PGCs in Gemmatimonadota. Several members of Gemmatimonadota, including novel lineages described below, are potentially able to capture light energy through photosynthetic phosphorylation for their growth (Fig. 3). Of the 326 nonredundant genomes, 43 are found to contain a ~40-kb-long photosynthesis gene cluster (PGC) (Table S1). These include genomes of Gemmatimonadota AP64 and TET16, the only two cultured phototrophic strains of this group (13, 15). Of the remaining 41 genomes, 22 are assembled from metagenomes obtained from fresh water, 13 from soda lakes, and 6 from other habitats. No phototrophic Gemmatimonadota have been detected in marine habitats. Taxonomically, 33 of the 43 genomes belong to the order of Gemmatimonadales, and the other 10 genomes to the UBA6960 family of the SG8-23 order (Table S1 and Fig. 2). To our knowledge, there have been no reports illustrating the structures of PGCs in SG8-23 or UBA6960. In this study, we assembled from the metagenomes of Qinghai Lake sediments three PGC-containing genomes of the UBA6960 family (N1_bin156, N4_bin48, and N5_bin42) and a PGC-containing genome of Gemmatimonadaceae (N4_bin22).
PGC genes in several genomes are located in different contigs or scaffolds, presumably as a result of the fragmented nature of metagenome assemblies. We chose nine PGCs, which are located in the same contig or scaffold, for further analysis. Although the PGCs of N5_bin42 are on a single contig and the PGCs of N1_bin156 and N4_bin48 are obtained by joining two contigs, the former is 100% identical to the latter two when the homologous sequences are compared (Fig. S3). Therefore, the PGCs from N4_bin48, the longest among the three genomes, was used in gene arrangement comparison with those from genomes in public databases (Fig. 4). PGCs from the genomes of two betaproteobacteria, Methyloversatilis universalis Fam500 and Rubrivivax gelatinosus IL-144, were used as references (13, 21).
All of the 11 selected PGCs contain three conserved gene clusters, i.e., bchFNBHLM, pufBALMC, and crtF-bchCXYZ, and belong to type II PGCs since bchFNBHLM and crtF-bchCXYZ are transcribed in opposite orientations (Fig. 4) (42). Based on the relative locations of acsF (encoding magnesium-protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester [oxidative] cyclase) and IhaA (encoding reaction center assembly proteins), they can be further divided into two subgroups, i.e., subtype I, in which acsF is located downstream of IhaA and the two genes are separated by puh (encoding reaction center assembly proteins) as well as unannotated genes, and subtype II, in which acsF is upstream of and adjacent to IhaA. All of the 10 PGCs from the SG8-23 genomes belong to subtype I, and all of the remaining 32 PGCs, except for one (S09.Bin022, GCA_011390645.1), are of subtype II (Table S2).
Among the bch genes encoding the biosynthesis of bacteriochlorophyll a (BChl a), bchIDO (genes coding for magnesium chelatase ATPase subunits I and D and putative accessory protein O) are arranged in distinctly different manners in the PGCs (Fig. 4). The bchID genes, which are upstream of crtF in PGCs from SG8-23, are normally transcribed in the same direction as the carotenoid synthesis gene (crtF). In comparison, the direction of transcription of bchID is reversed in PGCs from some Gemmatimonadales, such as AP64 and TET16. bchO from both SG8-23 and Gemmatimonadales, generally located between bchCXYZ and pufABLMC (encoding reaction center proteins), is transcribed in a direction opposite to that of the conserved bchCXYZ operon. Notably, bchO appears to be absent from some PGCs from both SG8-23 and Gemmatimonadales genomes (Fig. 4). Since frhB, which encodes the coenzyme F420-reducing hydrogenase beta subunit (EC:1.12.98.1), is found in both SG8-23 and Gemmatimonadales PGCs (e.g., GCA_007121925.1, GCA_007121555.1, GCA_016713435.1, and RH-20apr16-187), it could potentially replace bch2 (a 4.5-kDa chain of bacteriochlorophyll synthase) and form a unique bchP-frhB-bchG operon for BChla biosynthesis (Fig. 4) (4). Furthermore, a region highly variable with respect to the number of hypothetical genes or genes unrelated to photosynthesis as well as the direction of transcription of the genes exists between the puh and pufBALMC operons (Fig. 4). These observations suggest that PGCs have undergone a complex process of recombination following their divergence from a common ancestor, and two evolutionary pathways for photosynthesis have occurred within Gemmatimonadota.
Evolution of photosynthesis genes in Gemmatimonadota. Phototrophs include both retinalophototrophs and chlorophototrophs, which employ retinalrhodopsin and chlorophyll, respectively, to harvest light energy (43–45). Chlorophototrophs are currently found in seven bacterial phyla: Cyanobacteria, Proteobacteria (purple anoxygenic phototrophs), Chlorobi (green sulfur bacteria), Chloroflexi (green nonsulfur bacteria), Firmicutes (heliobacteria), Acidobacteria, and Gemmatimonadota (45). Aside from Cyanobacteria, chlorophototrophs from the remaining six phyla are anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria (APB) that harvest light using various forms of bacteriochlorophyll (bch) without oxygen production through water oxidation. Most APBs are found in restricted habitats. For example, Chlorobi species exist mainly in anoxic aquatic habitats (46), Chloroflexi species in low-oxygen hot springs (47–49), and the only Gram-positive APB (heliobacteria) in soil (50). In contrast, the APB of Gemmatimonadota appear to have a more cosmopolitan distribution (4, 16, 51).
To explore the evolutionary relationships of phototrophic Gemmatimonadota, proteins encoded by acsF, bchH, and pufLM in 73 genomes (Table S2) and selected homologous sequences from other phyla were used to construct phylogenetic trees (Fig. 5 and Fig. S4). AcsF, the aerobic magnesium-protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester (oxidative) cyclase, is an essential protein for BChla biosynthesis in all phototrophs and thus widely used in the phylogenetic analysis of phototrophs (13, 15–17, 52). BchH is the largest protein (~1,271 amino acids) encoded in the relatively conserved region (bchFNBHLM), whereas PufLM are the subunits of the photosynthetic reaction center. Gemmatimonadales and SG8-23 form two separate clusters, and they are clearly separated from the main chlorophototrophic groups, i.e., Cyanobacteria, Chloroflexi, Acidobacteria, Firmicutes, Chlorobi, and Proteobacteria, as revealed by the AcsF and BchH trees (Fig. 5 and Fig. S4). However, not all Gemmatimonadales cluster together in the PufL or PufM tree (Fig. S4), presumably due to frequent genetic exchanges as observed in the PGC structures. In all of the four phylogenetic trees (Fig. 5 and Fig. S4), Gemmatimonadota and Proteobacteria cluster in the same clade, demonstrating a common evolutionary origin of their photosystem. This supports the hypothesis that Gemmatimonadota acquired PGC via horizontal gene transfer (HGT) from Proteobacteria (13). However, it is still unclear what kind of HGT, e.g., transformation, transduction, or conjugation, is responsible for acquiring foreign PGCs across phyla. It has been reported that extrachromosomal replicons may play an important role in the transfer of PGCs in bacteria (53). Further, SG8-23 is more closely related to Proteobacteria than to Gemmatimonadales in the AcsF tree (Fig. 5), whereas Gemmatimonadales, and not SG8-23, is clustered with Proteobacteria in the same clade in the BchH tree (Fig. S4), suggesting PGC genes may have evolved at different rates in the two orders.
Taken together, our results suggest that the photosystem was acquired by the ancestor of Gemmatimonadota before it diverged into Gemmatimonadales, SG8-23, and other phototrophic orders. This suggestion is supported by high topological congruence between the organismal and PGC genes-based phylogenies of Gemmatimonadota. The acquired PGC genes are passed on in at least two independent routes, leading to subtypes I and II PGCs in Gemmatimonadota. Nonphototrophic Gemmatimonadota may have lost their PGC genes during the course of evolution.
Conclusions. Gemmatimonadota are globally distributed in various habitats, and both chemotrophic and phototrophic growth types are widely adopted by its members. Our genomic analysis suggests that Gemmatimonadota are capable of degrading various complex organic substrates and pursuing a heterotrophic pathway (e.g., glycolysis and TCA cycle) for their growth. Diverse strategies for energy conservation, including oxidative phosphorylation, substrate phosphorylation, and photosynthetic phosphorylation, are employed by Gemmatimonadota. And the processes of sufficient energy being stored in glucose through gluconeogenesis, followed by the synthesis of more complex compounds (e.g., glycogen and starch), are also prevalent in this phylum. Most members of the phylum are able to perform aerobic respiration. After diverging from the ancestor of Gemmatimonadota, the SG8-23 branch has become more suited to growth in saline environments, in agreement with the fact that most of the assembled genomes in this branch were originally from marine and saline soda habitats, than Gemmatimonadales. Moreover, the photosystem in Gemmatimonadota has evolved in two independent routes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS Sample collection, DNA extraction, and high-throughput sequencing. Three sediment samples, denoted N1, N4, and N5, were collected from Qinghai Lake, a perennial salt lake located in a structural intermontane depression at the northeastern corner of the Qinghai–Tibetan Plateau (54, 55), China, in June 2018. Each sample was placed in a sterile plastic bag using a sterile scoop and immediately stored at 4°C. The GPS coordinates of the sampling sites are listed in Data Set S1, Sheet 1. A fraction (10 g by wet weight) of each sample was subjected to DNA extraction as described previously (23, 56). DNA was purified by using a PowerClean Pro DNA Clean-Up Kit (MO BIO Laboratories), sheared to 400~500 bp in size with the Covaris M220 Focused-Ultrasonicator and quantified by the Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies Inc., USA). The sequencing libraries were constructed using the KAPA Hyper Prep Kit (Kapa Biosystems). Paired-end (PE) sequencing (2 × 250 bp) was conducted on an Illumina Hiseq-2500 platform at Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China. Deep-sea sediments (TVG05 and TVG06), from the Southwest Indian Ocean during the DY125-39 cruise with R/V Dayang No.1, have been previously described by Zheng et al. (23).
Metagenome assembly and genome binning. Raw reads from each sample were adapter trimmed, and low-quality reads were removed using fastp (v0.19.4) with default parameters (57). The clean PE reads from each sample were first merged using BBMerge (58) and separately assembled by SPAdes (v3.13.0, --meta --only-assembler) with a series of k-mers (i.e., 21, 31, 55, 77, 99, 121) (59). Contigs over 5 kb in length from each sample were selected for binning analysis using MetaBAT2 (v2.12.1) (60, 61) and MaxBin2 (v2.2.5) (62, 63) modules in MetaWRAP pipeline (v1.0.3) with default parameters (64). The resulting MAGs were refined by the bin_refinement module in the Binning_refiner (v1.2) (65) to filter out duplicate contigs and merge similar MAGs. The completeness, potential contamination, and strain heterogeneity of MAGs were evaluated via CheckM (v1.0.9) with lineage-specific marker genes (66). Taxonomic assignments of the MAGs were verified with GTDB-Tk (v0.3.3) (67, 68). Only medium- to high-quality (completeness ≥50% and contamination ≤5%) MAGs belonging to phylum Gemmatimonadota were retained for further analysis. The genome size of each MAG was estimated as described by Chen et al. (69). 16S rRNA gene tags were identified from merged reads and clustered against the SILVA database as described previously (23). Briefly, 16S rRNA gene tags were identified using the script “rna_hmm.py” (70, 71). And the resulting sequences were assigned (97% identity) to SILVA reference OTUs (release 138: SSU Ref NR 99) using UCLUST (71–73).
Phylogenetic analysis. Published genomes and MAGs of Gemmatimonadota (1, 12–15, 74), verified by GTDB-Tk (68), were retrieved from the NCBI Assembly database (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/all/GCA/, July 2021) and Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB, https://gtdb.ecogenomic.org/). Forty-five Gemmatimonadota MAGs of the freshwater origin, as reported by Mujakic et al. (4), were downloaded from Figshare (https://figshare.com/). To reduce redundancy, all above genomes were aggregated and dereplicated at 99% average nucleotide identity (ANI) using dRep v2.3.2 (parameters: -comp 50 -con 5 -sa 0.99) (24), resulting in a total of 326 strain-level genomes. These genomes were also dereplicated at 95% ANI to calculate the number of species represented. Values of orthologous average nucleotide identity (OrthoANI) and average amino acid identity (AAI) were calculated by using OrthoANIu (75) and EzAAI (76), respectively. Phylogenetic analysis of the above nonredundant genomes based on 120 bacterial marker proteins were conducted using the “identify” and “align” steps in GTDB-Tk (68). Maximum likelihood (ML) phylogeny was inferred with FastTree v.2.1.10 in the WAG+GAMMA model (77). The phylogenetic tree was visualized on the iTOL (78).
Functional annotation and metabolic reconstruction. Open reading frames (ORFs) in the above nonredundant genomes were predicted using Prokka (79) with default parameters. All ORFs were annotated using the KEGG database with GhostKOALA (80), eggNOG 5.0 using eggNOG-mapper 2 (80, 81), and Pfam 31.0 (82) using hmmsearch with a bit score of 30 (83). The MAGs and downloaded genomes were also submitted to the METABOLIC v2.0 annotation pipeline for functional annotation (84). Potential metabolic pathways were reconstructed based on these annotations. A hypergeometric test through the R package phytools (85) was applied to infer the metabolic differences among various Gemmatimonadota groups. ORFs encoding bacteriochlorophyll biosynthesis (acsF and bchH) and subunits of the photosynthetic reaction center complex (pufL and pufM) were aligned individually against proteins downloaded from the NCBI RefSeq genome database (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/all/GCF/, July, 2021) using Diamond (v0.9.10.111) with default parameter (86). Target proteins with the highest BLASTp scores at class level were selected for phylogeny analysis.
Pangenome and core genome analysis of Gemmatimonadota. A Gemmatimonadota pangenome is defined as the total number of protein-coding gene families found in all of the Gemmatimonadota genomes and MAGs. Since unknown portions of genes are missing from those incomplete genomes, a core genome of Gemmatimonadota is defined as all of the protein-coding gene families found in 95% of the genomes and high-quality MAGs (completeness ≥90% and contamination ≤5%). Gene families of the above ORFs were clustered using the get_homologues package (v3.4.3) (87) based on “diamond blastp” and “OMCL” algorithms with default parameters. Gene accumulation curves, which describe the sizes of the pan-genome and the core genome, were plotted using R package ggplot2 after adding new genome data during 100 random duplications (88). A gene content matrix consisting of the number of pan-genome orthologs in each genome was used to determine the relationship between each pair of genomes by deriving a correlation coefficient value (Pearson’s coefficient) using the “cor” function in the R program, and was further visualized using the “pheatmap” function for genomic similarity comparison (89).