https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resmic.2022.103998
Title: Comparative genomic analysis of the Dietzia genus: an insight into genomic diversity, and adaptation
Abstract: Dietzia strains are widely distributed in the environment, presenting an opportunistic role, and some species have undetermined taxonomic characteristics. Here, we propose the existence of errors in the classification of species in this genus using comparative genomics. We performed ANI, dDDH, pangenome and genomic plasticity analyses better to elucidate the phylogenomic relationships between
Dietzia strains. For this, we used 55 genomes of Dietzia downloaded from public databases that were combined with a newly sequenced. Sequence analysis of a phylogenetic tree based on genome similarity comparisons and dDDH, ANI analyses supported grouping different Dietzia species into four distinct groups. The pangenome analysis corroborated the classification of these groups, supporting the idea that some species of
Dietzia could be reassigned in a possible classification into three distinct species, each containing less variability than that found within the global pangenome of all strains. Additionally, analysis of genomic plasticity based on groups containing
Dietzia strains found differences in the presence and absence of symbiotic Islands and pathogenic islands related to their isolation site. We propose that the comparison of pangenome subsets together with phylogenomic approaches can be used as an alternative for the classification and differentiation of new species of the genus Dietzia.
Introduction The Dietzia genus was proposed by [ 1 ] to accommodate actinomycetes, previously known as Flavobacterium maris , and later classified as Rhodococcus maris [ 2 ]. In the corrected description, the Dietziaceae family is within the order of Corynebacteriales found in different habitats, notably in the soil ecosystem. Some strains are severe pathogens of humans (eg, Mycobacterium tuberculosis ), animals (e.g., Rhodococcus equi = Rhodococcus hoagii ), and plants (e.g., Rhodococcus fascians ). Along with the Dietziaceae family, the order also comprises the families Corynebacteriaceae , Gordoniaceae , Lawsonellaceae , Mycobacteriaceae , Nocardiaceae , Segniliparace, ae and Tsukamurellaceae and the type of the genus is Corynebacterium [ 2–4 ].
At the time of writing, there were thirteen species described for the genus: Dietzia aerolata [ 1 ], Dietzia alimentaria [ 5 ], Dietzia aurantiaca [ 6 ], Dietzia Cercidiphyllum [ 7 ], Dietzia cinnamea [ 8 ], Dietzia kunjamensis [ 9 ], Dietzia lutea [ 10 ], Dietzia maris [ 4 , 11 ], Dietzia natronolimnaea [ 12 ] Dietzia papillomatosis [ 13 ], Dietzia psychralcaliphila [ 14 ], Dietzia schimae [ 7 ] and Dietzia timorensis [ 15 ], all these published validly with the correct name in the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature [ 16 ]. Since its first description in 1995, Dietzia strains have been gradually isolated from natural habitats, such as moderately saline and alkaline East African soda lake [ 12 ], surface-sterilized plant tissues [ 7 ], soil [ 10 ], under mahogany trees in West [ 15 ], there are at least eight descriptions of Dietzia species that cause infections in humans [ 13 , 17–25 ], dog bite wound in an adult patient [ 26 ], Korean food [ 5 ], an air of a duck barn [ 1 ] and the cold desert of the Indian Himalaya [ 9 ].
Many of Dietzia 's isolation sites can be found in the BioSample/BioProject of each available sample at the National Center for Biotechnology Information taxonomy (NCBI) homepage ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/?term=Dietzia ). These bacteria also have many applications in various industries, particularly medical, chemical, and food [ 27 ]. Some works have shown that Dietzia species can degrade aliphatic hydrocarbons, such as n-alkanes, and some strains can degrade aromatic compounds [ 4 , 27 , 28 ]. Most Dietzia species can grow in high saline and alkaline conditions, suggesting their potential applicability in diverse environments). Furthermore, as Dietzia species can grow in low-temperature environments, they can be used for bioremediation in cold environments [ 28 ].
Dietzia is aerobic, Gram-positive, immobile, catalase-positive actinomycetes forming cocci germinating into short rods. The GC content of the genus ranges from 66 to 73 mol% [ 2 ]. Formerly classified as Rhodococcus species, Dietzia continues to be misidentified in this genus with many commercially available biochemical testing methods due to their phenotypic similarity, including traditional and commercial biochemical tests (Coryne API), as the micromorphological and clinical appearance of Dietzia strains, for example, are very similar to those of R. hoagii , formerly R. equi , an organism frequently encountered by medical microbiologists in their daily practice [ 27 , 28 ].
Dietzia strains can be easily distinguished from members of other genera using sequence data from the 16S rRNA gene. However, within the genus itself, it is occasionally impossible to determine some species' taxonomic status, as certain species of Dietzia are identical based on sequencing and PCR amplification of 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequences [ 2 , 29 ]. Furthermore, the genus Dietzia is still considered new, and so far, few studies have been aimed at the comparative genomic analysis of the genus.
16S rRNA gene sequencing is often not applicable to incomplete genomes (e.g, genes are not assembled), and these genes generally show higher sequence conservation than the genome average. Consequently, analysis of universal genes does not provide sufficient resolution at the species level and has often resulted in the lack of apparent genetic discontinuities between closely related taxa. In recent years, a methodology that offers several significant advantages, such as higher resolution between closely related genomes, is genome-wide mean nucleotide identity (ANI). The ANI draws an estimate of the genetic relationship between two organisms, informing if they belong to the same species if they present a value of ≥95% of ANI between them [ 30 ].
Another method to obtain an in-depth view of the genome of a species or genus is the pan-genomic approach, which provides us with the complete and non-redundant collection of genes of a species or genus and is composed of three subsets (central genome, shared genome, and singletons): the core genome, which is the collection of all genes commonly shared among all genomes used as a dataset; the shared genome, which contains only genes shared between two or more lineages, which are not present in all strains in the dataset; and, singletons, which are present in only one strain and are referred to as strain-specific genes [ 31 ].
We present a new phylogenetic/phylogenomic and comparative study of 55 sequenced genomes of Dietzia species available in public databases, combined with a novel genomic sequence isolated from a mare abscess in the region of Italy. The phylogenetic and phylogenomic relationships between these isolates of the Dietzia genus were compared, along with the pangenome. The complete inventory of genes found in any member of the species: the “core genome”, which is important for the basic processes of life; and singletons, which are usually related to environmental fitness and host adaptation. Finally, we provide information on specific subsets (pan and core genomes) of 56 Dietzia genomes and correlate these groups with the plasticity of genomic islands. These data will allow new insights into the contributions of the Dietzia genus to a correct characterization/differentiation of these species.
Material and methods Genomes of the genus Dietzia used for comparative genomic analysis All the genome sequences used in this study are listed in (Additional file: Table S1 ). The genome data of two samples, Dietzia sp. MeA6-2017 and D. maris 97 were retrieved from the BV-BRC: Bacterial and Viral Bioinformatics Resource Center public database, and 54 recovered genomes from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ). These were combined with data from the Dietzia sp. B32 was isolated from diffuse subcutaneous nodules of a mare in Reggio Calabria, Italy; this is the first genome of the Dietzia genus isolated from an animal. The complete genome sequence of the Dietzia sp. B32 was obtained on an Hiseq 2500 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) using paired-end libraries (2 × 150 bp). The quality of the sequencing reads was verified using the FastQC program (v.0.11.5) [ 32 ] and assembled by The Edena software (version 3.0) [ 33 ].
The Sspace and GapFiller algorithms were used to assess the contigs' order, distance, and orientation and fill the gap in paired readings, respectively [ 34 , 35 ]. In addition, gap closing procedures were conducted using the GFinisher tools [ 36 ], BLASTn [ 37 ], and the CLC Genomics Workbench 7 (Qiagen Inc.) was used for visualization and mapping of reads. The genome information can be found under Bio-project number (PRJNA802820), Biosample (SAMN25598616) GenBank accession number (CP093845.1). A workflow of the methodology is described in Fig. 1 . It contains all the steps of the methods of this work ( Fig. 1 ).
Phylogenetic/phylogenomyc The phylogenomic analysis was performed using Gegenees software (Version 2.1) [ 38 ], which calculated the percentage of similarity among the genomes of all strains. Gegenees separates genomes into small sequences and stipulates the minimum content shared by all genomes. Subsequently, the minimum shared contents obtained were subtracted from all genomes resulting in variable contents, which were eventually compared with all other strains to calculate similarity percentages [ 38 ]. Data generated by Gegenees were extracted as a distance matrix file in nexus format (.nex), and SplitsTree software (version 4.17.1) [ 39 ] was used to build a dendrogram using the method of Neighbor-joining with the generated distance matrix. Finally, these percentages were plotted on a heat map graph ranging from low similarity (red) to high similarity (green). Two other trees were inferred using the 16S rRNA gene sequence and another using the gyrB gene. The 16S rRNA and gyrB complete sequences were extracted from the genomes and aligned using the MUSCLE program provided in MEGAX v.10.1.8 [ 40 ]. After alignment, a phylogenetic tree was inferred using the maximum likelihood method with MEGAX software v.10.1.8 [ 40 ]. The topography of the reconstructed tree was evaluated by bootstrap analysis with 1000 repetitions [ 41 ]. Tsukamurella paurametabola ATCC8368 was used as an external group. Finally, figures of all phylogenetic trees were generated using the Interactive Tree of Life (iTOL) [ 42 ].
Average nucleotide identity and DNA–DNA hybridization We performed an Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) analysis using the whole-genome sequences. ANI represents a mean of identity/similarity values between homologous genomic regions shared by two genomes. ANI was estimated by the JSpecies Web Server (available at http://imedea.uib-csic.es/jspecies/about.html ) [ 43 ], based on BLAST [ 37 ]. Typically, the threshold frontier to consider two organisms to belong to the same species could be set at > 95% identity for ANI [ 30 , 43 ].
The digital values of DNA–DNA hybridization (dDDH) were calculated using the Genome-to-Genome Distance Calculator 2.1 provided by the Leibniz Institute DSMZ website ( http://ggdc.dsmz.de/distcalc2.php ) with recommended parameters and/or default settings, respectively [ 44 ]. If the genomic DNA of two respective organisms reveals a DDH similarity of above 70%, this is the main argument to regard them as the same species and vice versa [ 44 , 45 ]. For this analysis, we performed the calculation just to the results obtained in the analysis of the ANI, for the groups formed in the ANI that had a type species, it was used as the query to search for the dDDH values.
Pangenome calculation The core genome (shared by all strains), shared genome (genes present in two or more than two strains, and singletons (strain-specific genes) were identified using OrthoFinder software (Version 2.4.1) through the default parameters [ 46 ]. Furthermore, we used an in-house script in the results provided by the program for the separation of core, shared and singleton [ 47 ]. OrthoFinder uses the. faa amino acid sequence file for each genome to perform all- vs -all BLASTp for the Orthologous analysis [ 46 ].
To calculate the pangenome development, we apply Heap's Law, with the formula n = n = k ∗ N −α, where n is the expected number of genes for a given number of genomes, n is the number of genomes, and the other terms are constants defined to fit the specific curve [ 47 , 48 ]. According to Heap's law, a value of α ≤ 1 is representative of an open pangenome; this means that each added genome will contribute some new genes and the pangenome will increase. Instead, an α value > 1 represents a closed pangenome, in which the addition of new genomes will not significantly affect the size of the pangenome [ 47 , 48 ]. For this analysis, the same groups found in the ANI were defined in three different environments. Group A is classified as an environment in general for presenting several different environments, group B was classified as a pathogenicity group for being formed with most clinical samples, and group C was considered as a group of Industrial water for presenting the majority samples isolated from an environment containing water; group D was not used, as it does not present any described species, only designated with the genus (Additional file: Table S3 ).
Identification of genes encoding virulence factors and antibiotic resistance genes In addition, a search for resistance and virulence genes was performed using the core genome obtained by pan-genomic analysis considering all strains in the dataset. The database used to search for resistance and virulence genes were CARD and VICTORS, respectively [ 49 , 50 ]. To infer presence, a minimum identity of 70% was considered.
Analysis of genomic plasticity Predictions of genomic islands (GEIs) as metabolic islands (MIs), pathogenicity islands (PAIs), and symbiotic islands (SIs) were predicted using GIPSy (Genomic Island prediction) software (version 1.1) [ 51 ]. We used the same groups according to the environment defined in the pangenome analyses (Additional file: Table S3 ). We used the same groups according to the environment defined in the pangenome analysis (Additional file: Table S3 ). For group A, D. kunjamensis 313 was used as a reference; for group B D . sp. Oral taxon 368 was used as a reference, and in the group, C D. natronolimnaea HS-1 was used as a reference. The strain D. sp. oral taxon was used to predict the SIs and PAIs of groups A and C and the D. sp. JS16-p6b was used as a non-pathogenic species for the prediction of PAIs in group B. After curation of the PAIs, genes from all islands in each lineage were evaluated for presence/absence in all other lineages in the group. The island’s SIs and PAIs were plotted using BRIG software [ 52 ].
Results General features The genome lengths varied by 3,4 Mb in size. The GC content ranged from 70.43% and around 3435 predicted CDS. The genome information can be found under Bio project number (PRJNA802820), Biosample (SAMN25598616) GenBank accession number (CP093845).
Phylogenomic and Phylogenetic analysis of Dietzia We built two phylogenetic trees based on a single gene using the 16S rRNA genes and the gyrB gene (Additional file: Fig. S1 A and B). In the trees of 16S and gyrB, it is possible to observe that the species of Dietzia are mixed in the clades, without a correct distinction of the species, the species were present in several different clades. D. maris can be found in two clades with other species of the genus, making it difficult to distinguish which species belongs (Additional file: Fig. S1 A and B).
The distance matrix generated using Gegenees software was plotted as a heatmap ( Fig. 2 A), in which the similarity among genomes varied from ∼4% ( D. timorensis ID05-A0528 T ) to ∼98% (between the genomes of D. psychralcaliphila ILA-1 and D. psychralcaliphila DSM 44820 T ). The similarity analysis using Gegenees revealed that the genomes of Dietzia can be clustered into at least four groups A, B, C, and D ( Fig. 2 B). However other genomes were only distantly related to the other strains, such as D. timorensis ID05-A0528T, D. aurantiaca J3, D. aerolata Sj14aT, and D. alimentaria 72T, these genomes did not cluster with any other sequence, D. psychralcaliphila groups correctly with its three strains described ( Fig. 2 B).
Dietzia genus has four major groups distinguished by ANI and dDDH without taxonomic distinction We performed an Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) analysis using genome sequence data (Additional file: Table S1 ). Using a 95% identity cutoff, this analysis revealed the presence of the same four groups presented in the Gegenees analyses. In cluster A it is possible to observe that the species D. maris 97, D. kunjamensis subsp. schimae YIM65001 T , D. alimentaria BP-27-1, and D. kunjamensis DSM44907 cluster together ( Fig. 3 ). It is possible to find this same pattern in groups B and C, in which D. maris DSM 43672 T , D. cinnamea BP-168, D. papillomatosis NBRC-105045 and Dietzia massiliensis Marseille -Q0999 T are grouped in group B and group C two distinct species Dietzia cercidiphylli YIM 65002 T and D. natronolimnaea HS-1 are shown grouped ( Fig. 3 ). However, in group D we did not obtain any species, only lineages designated with the genus ( Fig. 3 ).
We also obtained some paired comparisons that resulted in values < 95%, indicating that they can be considered distinct bacterial species, such as D. aurantiaca J3 a (just a representative), D. timorensis ID05-A0528 T (just a representative), D. aerolata Sj14a T (just a representative), D. lutea YIM 80766 T (just a representative) and D. psychralcaliphila (three representatives of the same species: shared more than 95% ANI and >70% dDDH with each other). The genome of Dietzia sp. B32 did not show an ANI value greater than 95%, indicating that it is a distinct species ( Fig. 3 ).
Furthermore, the results of the dDDH calculation corroborate those of the ANI approaches in finding that the sequences of the genomes that clustered together present a dDDH value greater than 70%. However, D. massiliensis Marseille -Q0999 T and D. kunjamensis subsp schimae DSM 45139, samples showed a dDDH lower than allowed it belongs to the same species (69.3% and 69.5% respectively) (Additional file: Table S2 ). It is generally accepted that ANI values of 95–96% equate to a DDH value of 70% and can be used as a threshold for species delineation [ 53 , 54 ]. The analysis of similarity, ANI, and dDDH shows that some species of Dietzia deserve attention in their valid classification, and some of these species could be reassigned, as shown in Table 1 . Although the ANI estimates are the gold standard for bacterial species determination, the ANI and phylogenomic analysis did not allow taxonomic classification, however, it will enable us to identify at least four major groups within the Dietzia genus, showing species that could be reassigned.
Pangenome calculation for 3 groups of Dietzia To take a global view of the Dietzia genome and further explore the genomic diversity of this genus, we calculated the size of the pangenome based on different datasets. When we examined all the genomes together, orthologs analysis showed that the pangenome contained a total of 614 core genes, 6536 accessories, and 3494 singletons ( Fig. 4 A). When we consider only group A genomes, we found a total of 1370 core genes, 3518 accessory genes, and 1701 singletons ( Fig. 4 B). The group B pangenome had 2150 core genes, 1376 accessories, and 878 singletons ( Fig. 4 C) and Group C had 1796 core genes, 2180 accessories, and 1237 singletons ( Fig. 4 D). Using the formula α = 1−γ, we inferred that the α value of the pangenome of all genomes was 0.69, indicating that the pangenome is probably open and increasing. Similarly, the extrapolation of the pangenome size calculated for groups A, B, and C generated α values of 0.74, 0.88, 0.82, and 0.75 respectively ( Fig. 5 A, B, C, and D). In the tree formed with the core genome, the results corroborate those found in the analysis of ANI, dDDH, Gegenees, being possible to visualize the formation of the 4 groups (Additional file: Fig. S2 ).
Antibiotic resistance genes and virulence factors (VFs) predicted in the genus Dietzia within the core genome
In the search for resistance genes and virulence factors, the core genome obtained by pan-genomic analysis was used, considering all strains in the dataset. The database used was CARD and VICTORS respectively. To infer presence, a minimum identity of 70%. Two resistance genes were found, namely (I) mtrA, the gene encoding the “DNA-binding response regulator MtrA” protein, an efflux pump capable of generating resistance to macrolides; (II) rpoB2, an analog of rpoB that shows the same function as its paralog and that confers resistance to rifampicin by acting as a competitive inhibitor ( https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/?query=∗ ).
Twelve virulence genes were found, as follows (I) mtrA – resistance gene mentioned above; (II) panD - coding for the aspartate alpha-decarboxylase protein that determines the rate of the gamma-aminobutyric acid reaction (III) icl - encoding the enzyme isocitrate lyase that acts on the malate biosynthesizer complex and on energy production; (IV) Rv3489 - encoding a hypothetical protein (V) accD1 - gene encoding the beta subunit of the carboxylase carboxyl transferase enzyme and acts in the production of energy through the manipulation of Acetyl-CoA; (VI) relay - a gene associated with the success of Pseudomonas aeruginosa as an extracellular pathogen (VII) sigH – coding factor H of RNA polymerase; (VIII) mprA – a transcriptional repressor and also acts as a response to antibiotics (IX) ino1 - encoded inositol-3-phosphate synthase and acts on the conversion of glucose into inositol; (X) coaA-a structural gene that acts in the biosynthesis of coenzyme A (XI) ftsY - Involved in targeting and insertion of nascent membrane proteins into the cytoplasmic membrane. Acts as a receiver for the complex formed by the signal recognition particle (SRP) and the ribosome-nascent chain (RNC). Interaction with SRP-RNC leads to the transfer of the RNC complex to the Sec translocase for insertion into the membrane, the hydrolysis of GTP by both Ffh and FtsY, and the dissociation of the SRP-FtsY complex into the individual components (UNIPROT, https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/?query=∗ ); (XII) sigE – necessary factor for the differentiation and development of heterocysts.
Detection of islands in Dietzia's genome and variations in symbiotic islands between group A and group C
The genome plasticity of the three groups was determined using GIPSy (Genomic Island Prediction Software). BRIG software (BLAST Ring Image Generator) [25] was used to visualize the circular comparison of the genome, using only the samples present in the group. We found differences in the presence/absence of symbiotic islands in a study based on groups: seven symbiotic islands (SIs) in group A; and fourteen SIs in group C ( Fig. 6 A and B).
Regarding the presence of genes in SIs, we compared genes in all strains of group A with each other. When we compared the genes related to the SIs of group A with those of group C, there were differences in several genes found that were present only in group A and others only in group C. Among these genes, we can highlight the cupin domain-containing protein present only in the C group. Cupin domain-containing proteins have been found in organisms from thermophilic bacteria to plants and animals that inhabit a whole spectrum of environments. When the domain is conserved, it can provide a stable scaffold that allows these proteins to survive and function under various extreme conditions [ 55 ]. In addition, the clusters of genes related to SI7 of group A were similar to SI3 of group C, where there were differences in three genes found that were present only in A (SDR family oxidoreductase, TetR/AcrR family transcriptional regulator, phosphotransferase family protein) and three other genes present only in group C (C40 family peptidase, precorrin-6A/cobalt-precorrin-6A reductase, cobyrinic acid a,c-diamide synthase) ( Fig. 6 A and B).
Interestingly, we found that the genomic region related to SI7 and SI13 of group C was not present in any of the SIs of group A. This may reflect that the genomic signature of these regions can already be adapted to specific isolation sites. The list of genes related to SI7 and SI13 of group C is mentioned in Additional file: Table S4 .
Detection of islands in Dietzia's genome and variations in pathogenic islands (PAIs) between groups A, B, and group C
The pathogenic islands were analyzed for the three groups A, B, and C: seven PAIs in group A; eight PAIs in group B, and ten PAIs in group C ( Fig. 7 A, B, and C, respectively). Nonetheless, aimed at finding specific genes in group B, as it is the group that presents isolated cases from clinical samples. Regarding PAIs, it was not possible to find any island for any of the three groups, however, several genes were specific to each group: group A (72), group B (47) and group C (97). However, group B presented important proteins such as type II toxin-antitoxin system Phd/YefM family antitoxin, antibiotic biosynthesis monooxygenase, ferric iron reductase, and universal stress protein, which may be associated with its pathogenic role ( Fig. 7 B).
Discussion The micromorphological, biochemical, growth, and cellular chemotaxonomic characteristics of a microorganism are often applied to isolate and identify that microorganism [ 27 ]. However, these strategies are not always adequate for classification and identification, some studies have carried out the reclassification of some Dietzia species that had previously been misidentified as R. equi , as well as other actinomycetes [ 27 ].
Species definition and the best methods for taxonomic classification in prokaryotes continue to be debated [ 56 , 57 ]. Measures of phenotypic similarity have defined many bacterial species and many of these methods may be inadequate or unable to keep up with the levels of diversity being discovered in nature [ 58 ]. 16S rRNA genes have been widely used in bacteria to study phylogenetic relationships. Despite that, this approach is difficult since several forces that configure the evolution of bacterial genomes act with different strengths on different parts of the genome and bacterial strains [ 59 , 60 ]. Therefore, it is important to consider not only 16S rRNA sequences but also the whole genome to determine the diversity within a bacterial genus or species.
The study of the evolutionary history of the genus Dietzia has been primarily carried out through 16S rRNA sequence analysis and phenotypic tests, including traditional biochemical tests [ 2 , 27 ]. Some authors have reported difficulty in differentiating Dietzia species. For instance, in the study of Niwa et al., 2012, the sequence of the 16S rRNA gene from the type strains of D. schimae and D. cercidiphylli were identical to D. maris and D. natronolimnaea , respectively, and it was not possible to identify which species the strain belonged only to using the 16S rRNA gene [ 61 ]. Sudhindra et al., 2016 showed in their work that Dietzia spp. isolated from cardiac tissue showed that D. cercidiphylli has an identical 16S rRNA sequence and cannot be distinguished from D. natronolimnaea using the MicroSEQ 500 sequencing kit [ 62 ].
Phylogenetic analysis using sequences from the 16S rRNA gene has been applied and has also become important as a means of identifying an unknown bacterium at the genus or species level, but for the genus Dietzia, the 16S rRNA gene has not been a good marker for the identification of bacteria. species, as the 16S rRNA gene sequences, can sometimes be identical. The 16S rRNA gene is often not applicable to incomplete genomes (e.g., genes are not assembled, and have partial genes), as species characterization is based on sequencing and PCR amplification of 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequences [ 30 ]. Consequently, analysis of universal genes does not provide sufficient resolution at the species level and has often resulted in the lack of clear genetic discontinuities between closely related taxa.
Here in this work, using the 16S rRNA and gyrB gene, it was not possible to have a clear view of the distinction of the species of the genus, the species are mixed in the broths formed in the tree. However, the gyrB gene managed to separate these species with better precision, presenting a better bootstrap value than the 16S, most of the bootstrap values for the 16S were less than 50%. Despite better clade formation using the gyrB gene, many Dietzia strains do not cluster with their species. D. maris appears in two distinct clades, along with other species such as D. cinnamea , and D. papillomatosis , making it difficult to distinguish precisely which species is the real one.
These ambiguities motivated our use of other techniques to better understand diversity within the Dietzia genus. A genome-wide similarity matrix was obtained with the Gegenees software and used for a phylogenomic analysis showed 4 large groups: A, B, C and D. What we show once again that the 16S rRNA gene is not a good marker for classify Dietzia species. To improve the resolution of our analysis, ANI analysis showed new relationships identified, in group A, D. maris 97, D. maris IMV-195, D. maris SST1, D. alimentaria BP-27-1, D. kunjamensis K30-10 T , D. kunjamensis 313, D. kunjamensis DSM-44907, D. kunjamensis subs. schimae DSM-45139 and D. kunjamensis subs. schema YIM-65001 T , grouped, showing to be very close, and can be considered distinct strains and not distinct species; however, there are two types of strains in this group, which makes it difficult to know which species this group really belongs to. In group B, D. cinnamea NBRC 102147, D. papillomatosis NBRC105045, D. maris DSM-43672, D. maris AMT, and D. massiliensis Marseille-Q0999 T could belong to a single species, and not distinct species. Likewise, in the genomes of group C, the classification of D. natronolimnaea HS-1 could be a strain of D. cercidiphylli YIM 65002 T considering that D. cercidiphylli YIM 65002 T is a strain type. In group D, only genomes designated with the genus, but which have a high ANI value, share more than 98.64%.
We also applied a strategy based on the calculation of DNA–DNA Hybridization. Here, for the four groups (A, B, C, and D) the dDDH value presented a value greater than 70%, except D. kunjamensis subsp. schimae DSM-45139 and D. massiliensis Marseille-Q0999 T presented a DDH lower than 70%, which is the limit to consider that two samples belong to the same species, as shown in the results of the AN analysis, except for these two isolates. These results corroborate the results found in the work of Nouioui et al., 2018 in which in their DDH analyses it was not possible to distinguish some validly named species, even at the subspecies level, since they presented dDDH values > 79%, these included Cellulosimicrobium aquatile [ 63 ]) vs. Cellulosimicrobium funkei [ 64 ]; D. cinnamea [ 65 ] vs. D. maris [ 11 ]; several species of Bifidobacterium, Nocardiopsis and Streptomyces [ 3 ] .
To further corroborate the existence of these potential “misclassifications of Dietzia species”, we performed a pangenome analysis, which confirmed the new relationships identified in previous analyses. Using our grouping of the Dietzia genus, supported by the results of the Gegenees, ANI , and DDH, investigated genomic diversity through pangenome calculation analysis. The same four datasets were used to perform pangenome calculations. As would be expected, the number of genes in the core genome was greater in each cluster than in the dataset containing all 56 genomes, which is consistent with the idea that the genomes within a cluster are of the same species. Extrapolations from pangenome development also supported this assumption. The α value generated from an analysis of all genomes indicated that the Dietzia genus has an open pangenome (α = 0.69), as well as each of the groups (α = 0.74, α = 0.82, α = 0.75 and α = 0.88, respectively). However, intragroup α values reveal that these latter pangenomes are increasing in size more slowly than the pangenome of all species (as indicated by higher α values). This means that if we consider all genomes as part of the Dietzia genus, each new genome sequenced will substantially increase the number of non-redundant genes in this genus. This phylogenetic approach to pangenome analysis revealed patterns fully in agreement with the results of our other analyses. In the tree of the core genome, it is also possible to visualize the separation of the four groups defined in the previous analyses, corroborating the idea that some species of Dietzia are strains of some species and not distinct species.
Interspecies genome plasticity can result from several events, of which horizontal gene transfer is particularly important because it can cause the acquisition of gene blocks (genomic islands, or GIs), producing evolution by quantum leaps [ 66 ]. Generally, these genes are often flanked by transposases (insertion elements) and have altered G + C content and skew, suggesting their acquisition through Horizontal Gene Transfer (HGT), mediated by phages or recombination [ 67 ].
The analysis of genome plasticity reveals differences in the presence and absence of some regions of the genome when compared at the group level. Symbiotic islands provide the bacterium with a genomic repertoire to sustain a symbiotic host–bacterium relationship [ 68 ] and characterize a class of Genomic Island [ 51 ]. Comparative analysis of SIs showed the absence of genes at the group level. We found clusters of genes belonging to SI7 and SI13 of group C that was not identified in any SI of group A. However, only SI7 was present in all strains of group C. A protein present in SI7 is ribbon-helix-helix protein, CopG family, this protein regulates the transcription of genes that may be involved in metal uptake, amino acid biosynthesis, cell division, plasmid copy number control, bacteriophage lytic cycle [ 69 ]. Another protein found in SI7 is a trypsin-like serine protease. Prokaryotic serine proteases are involved in several physiological processes associated with cell signaling, defense response, and development. Proteases belonging to the trypsin family have been implicated in the heat shock response, as well as being important in the growth and defense response in various bacteria [ 70 ].
The type II protein toxin-antitoxin system Phd/YefM family antitoxin found for group B are small genetic elements composed of a toxic protein and its cognate antitoxin protein, the latter neutralizing the toxicity of the former. This protein has been implicated in several biological processes, including plasmid maintenance, phage inhibition, persistence, stress response, and biofilm formation [ 71 ]. Another important protein for the group was the antibiotic biosynthesis monooxygenase (ABM) domain, which is found in proteins involved in several biological processes, including metabolism, transcription, translation, and secondary metabolite biosynthesis, and in Streptomyces coelicolor ActVA-Orf6, monooxygenase, a role in the biosynthesis of aromatic polyketides, specifically the antibiotic actinorhodin, oxidizing phenolic groups to quinones [ 72 ]. Universal stress protein participates in a range of cellular responses to biotic and biotic stresses. Its physiological functions are associated with ion elimination, hypoxia responses, cell mobility, and regulation of cell growth and development, which may consist of its roles in resistance to multiple stresses [ 73 ]. Finally, ferric reductases are widely distributed electron transport proteins that are expressed by numerous infectious organisms and have been identified as a key virulence factor for the establishment of infection by single-celled pathogens [ 74 ]. The true pathogenic profile of Dietzia is not yet known, nevertheless, these proteins may contribute to the true pathogenicity of some species described for the genus.
Conclusion Taken together, our analyzes suggest that there is more phylogenetic complexity in classifying these species than has been previously shown in other studies. In short, each of the analyzes we performed suggested the existence of an error in the classification of the species of the genus Dietzia , which leads us to the fact that notably, some species probably need to be reassigned. In addition, considering the genes in SIs and PAIs, we identified some absence of symbiotic islands in all strains present in group A. The genes present in the pathogenicity islands of group B are absent in the strains of groups A and C, which reveals that the presence/absence of genomic islands may be related to the isolation location.
Final remarks Here, we used a variety of methods to analyze whole genome data, which together showed that: (i) the current application for differentiating between Dietzia species should be reviewed; (ii) this genus contains at least four separate groups; and (iii) sequencing of the gyrB gene can be used efficiently to reliably identify Dietzia species. Collectively, our results provide evidence for reconsidering the phylogenetic and genomic relationship between species currently assigned to Dietzia .
Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to combine an analysis of pangenome development with an analysis of ANI and dDDH to support the attribution that some Dietzia species could be reassigned. Here, we aim that subsets of pangenomes and the α value generated by these analyzes can be used as an alternative approach, together with ANI, and dDDH, for the in-silico classification of species of the genus Dietzia . A high intragroup α value can be considered a good indicator of a new, more clonal species within the genus, although low α values can be discovered within a species group due to the high degree of variation between genomes resulting from horizontal gene transfer events.