https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.12.006
Title: Novel integrative elements and genomic plasticity in ocean ecosystems
Abstract: Horizontal gene transfer accelerates microbial evolution. The marine picocyanobacterium Prochlorococcus
exhibits high genomic plasticity, yet the underlying mechanisms are elusive. Here, we report a novel family of DNA transposons—“tycheposons”—some of which are viral satellites while others carry cargo, such as nutrient-acquisition genes, which shape the genetic variability in this globally abundant genus. Tycheposons share distinctive mobile-lifecycle-linked hallmark genes, including a deep-branching site-specific tyrosine recombinase. Their excision and integration at tRNA genes appear to drive the remodeling of genomic islands—key reservoirs for flexible genes in bacteria. In a selection experiment, tycheposons harboring a nitrate assimilation cassette were dynamically gained and lost, thereby promoting chromosomal rearrangements and host adaptation. Vesicles and phage particles harvested from seawater are enriched in tycheposons, providing a means for their dispersal in the wild. Similar elements are found in microbes co-occurring with
Prochlorococcus , suggesting a common mechanism for microbial diversification in the vast oligotrophic oceans.
Introduction Prochlorococcus is the smallest and numerically most abundant cyanobacterium in the oceans. It possesses a large pangenome and contains hypervariable genomic islands that have been linked to niche differentiation and phage defense. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 Adaptations to light and temperature broadly define clades in the genus, which are subdivided into a mosaic of co-existing subpopulations in the wild. 5 , 6 , 7 This structure provides stability and resilience to the global population in the face of viral predation and changing environmental conditions. 8 , 9 , 10 While the importance of variable genomic islands in the ecology of Prochlorococcus is well known, how they are formed and acquire new genes remains an open question because most cells lack common means of horizontal gene transfer, such as conjugative systems 11 and genes for natural competence. 12 Island diversification via gene exchange with cyanophages has been observed for genes involved in photosynthesis, high-light adaptation, and other metabolic functions, 13 , 14 , 15 but evidence for prophage-mediated transduction is rare: while some cyanophages carry integrase genes and putative attachment sites linked to recombination hotspots in Prochlorococcus genomes, 16 , 17 only one partial prophage has been observed in hundreds of available genomes. 18 Prochlorococcus cells, moreover, appear devoid of any common mobile genetic elements (MGEs) including plasmids, transposons, insertion sequences (ISs), or integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs), 19 , 20 , 21 with the exception of a few transposons and ISs previously identified in the most basal Prochlorococcus clade LLIV. 17 This overall limited ability to utilize canonical horizontal gene transfer mechanisms—seemingly inconsistent with a large and widely distributed pangenome 7 , 22 , 23 , 24 —motivated us to explore genomes of cultured and wild Prochlorococcus cells 21 for evidence of mechanisms promoting genomic island diversity in this group.
Results A hidden mobilome in Prochlorococcus genomic islands While the term “genomic island” is sometimes used in reference to individual MGEs, 25 here we use it to identify large chromosomal regions with high interstrain variability and a relatively high density of flexible genes (i.e., those not shared by all genomes), which is consistent with early descriptions of genomic islands in Prochlorococcus . 1 In most cases, these regions do not represent mobile units but heterogeneous aggregations of horizontally transferred material. 26
Searching for clues as to how island hotspots of variability arise and are maintained over evolutionary timescales in this genus, we annotated genomic islands in 623 Prochlorococcus genomes from cultured isolates and wild single cells 21 ( Table S1 ). These genomes belong to ten distinct phylogenetic clades, groupings that serve as ecologically and evolutionarily relevant units of differentiation in this system. 5 , 19 , 27 We identified well-defined islands using a custom hidden-Markov-model (HMM)-based approach that distinguishes them based on their differential enrichment of flexible genes ( Figure S1 A). In all genomes, we found on average of 8–10 islands per clade, typically between 4 and 200 kbp in size, that comprise about one-quarter of all genes per genome. The islands harbor more than two-thirds of all flexible genes of the Prochlorococcus pangenome ( Figure S1 B; Table S2 ).
Consistent with more limited studies, 1 , 28 most Prochlorococcus islands we identified are directly adjacent to 7 tRNA genes (proline tgg , serine tga , alanine ggc , threonine ggt , arginine tct , one of three methionines cat , and the tmRNA gene—a bifunctional transfer-messenger RNA important for releasing stalled ribosomes) ( Figure S2 ). Because tRNA genes are known integration hotspots for a variety of MGEs, 29 we reconsidered the traditional notion that Prochlorococcus genomes generally lack MGEs and carefully re-examined the available genomes for signatures of such entities.
First, we used straightforward approaches (see STAR Methods ) to screen for the presence of well-known types of MGEs, including prophages, integrative plasmids, transposons, casposons, ISs, ICEs, and pathogenicity- and phage-inducible chromosomal islands (PICIs). These searches did not reveal any clearly recognizable MGEs other than some known ISs and transposons in the most basal Prochlorococcus clade (LLIV). 17 The key to unveiling Prochlorococcus’ mobilome emerged from manually examining a particular, small genomic island (6.9 kbp) we had identified, which shared a notably high nucleotide-level identity (99%) in two genomes from different clades (HLI and HLII; Figure S1 C), indicating a horizontal transfer event. This region coded for a large serine recombinase—an integrase-type protein common in MGEs—and eight additional hypothetical genes. Using advanced remote homology detection 30 we further examined the hypothetical genes and identified a putative transcriptional regulator (MerR-like), a putative major capsid protein (HK97-fold), a replicative helicase (DnaB-like), and three smaller genes coding for proteins with remote structural similarity to replication factors often found in phages and other MGEs. Together, these features were consistent with the presence of an MGE in this island, and we used its sequence to iteratively identify more related MGEs and ultimately curate a comprehensive set of hallmark proteins of Prochlorococcus’ integrase-centered mobilome ( Table S3 ). With these proteins, we identified 937 putative integrase-carrying MGEs across the set of 623 Prochlorococcus genomes, providing the basis for the following detailed study on these MGEs and their role in Prochlorococcus evolution and ecology.
Tycheposons: Novel DNA transposons with roles in phage interference and nutrient acquisition As we describe in detail below, about half of the identified Prochlorococcus MGEs (501 of 937) constitute a cohesive new family of cargo-carrying DNA transposons ( Figures 1 and 2 ). Some of these MGEs encode functions associated with conferring a fitness advantage under known stresses in the marine environment. We named these novel MGEs tycheposons, referring to the Greek deity Tyche, a guardian of fortune and prosperity and a daughter of Oceanus. As we argue with evidence below, tycheposons form an independent lineage of MGEs that (1) share a common set of hallmark genes facilitating mobility and replication, which are distinct from other MGEs ( Figure 2 ); (2) contain a site-specific integrase—most often a site-specific tyrosine recombinase belonging to a lineage unique to tycheposons—which leaves integrated elements flanked by partial tRNA repeats ( Figures 1 and 3 ); (3) have a conserved gene organization with an inward-facing integrase at one end and an optional, small replication module either next to the integrase or at the opposite end ( Figure 1 ); and finally (4) carry cargo with clear implications in terms of adaptation to the local environment—e.g., facilitating nutrient acquisition and phage interference ( Figure 1 ).
To arrive at this definition of tycheposons, we initially classified all Prochlorococcus MGEs in the context of known MGEs using a gene-sharing network approach. 39 , 40 , 41 We co-clustered all hallmark proteins of the Prochlorococcus mobilome (those with functions related to a mobile lifestyle, including recombination and DNA replication and packaging)—together with all proteins from NCBI viral RefSeq; all proteins from the mobileOG database (a comprehensive database based on 10 million hallmark proteins sequences of all major classes of MGEs) 42 ; and an additional set of proteins representing PICIs which are MGEs with genomic architectures similar to some elements we identified, which is discussed in more detail below. We then computed a bipartite network linking MGEs by shared protein clusters to analyze how the different Prochlorococcus MGEs relate to each other as well as to known MGE types ( Figure 2 ).
Based on this network, roughly half (501) of Prochlorococcus MGEs—the tycheposons—form a tightly connected cluster encompassing the vast majority of the MGE hallmark proteins providing the basis for defining these elements as a new and independent lineage of MGEs. Only three of the tycheposon-associated protein clusters also contained sequences from well-known MGE classes: a cluster of major capsid proteins contained viral sequences; a truncated tyrosine recombinase found on plasmids and viruses; and a rare (6 proteins in tycheposons) but apparently promiscuous replicative helicase also found in plasmids, ICEs, and viruses. The other half of the MGEs in the network were cryptic elements, lacking identifiable hallmark genes other than integrases and excisionases, and we excluded them from analyses beyond those two genes unless otherwise stated.
In addition to their distinct gene pool, tycheposons differ from other known families of MGEs in a key feature of transposable elements classification: the enzyme that catalyzes their movement. 43 The most abundant prokaryotic transposable elements are IS-like transposons with their autonomous representatives—ISs and composite transposons—encoding transposases that typically lack site-selectivity and enable integration at different locations within the same genome. By contrast, Prochlorococcus tycheposons and cryptic elements encode site-specific integrases (910 out of 937 contain a phage-integrase-like tyrosine recombinase and the rest a large serine recombinase) that recognize short sequence motifs—so-called attachment sites. 44 Such integrases have been shown to catalyze the recombination between two attachment sites, facilitating either the integration of excised MGEs into the recipient genome (recombination between one attachment site on the MGE and one in the genome) or the excision of an already integrated MGE (recombination between the two attachment sites flanking the MGE after integration). The directionality of this reversible cut-and-paste transposition mechanism is often regulated by an excisionase, which, if expressed, inhibits reintegration. 44
Among the different tyrosine recombinases of the Prochlorococcus mobilome, those encoded by tycheposons stand out further due to their integration sites and their phylogeny. For integration, they specifically target 40-nucleotide-long attachment sites in 7 tRNA genes that abut Prochlorococcus ’ major genomic islands ( Table S4 ). With the attachment sites located at the start/end of the tRNA genes and the full-length genes reconstituted by the incoming attachment site, the targeted tRNA genes are not functionally disrupted. This integration process, which likely can also occur at partial tRNAs, leaves an integrated tycheposon flanked at least by partial tRNAs on both sides—a hallmark for discerning boundaries of complete tycheposons in genomic analyses ( Figure 1 ).
With few exceptions, the phylogenies we reconstructed for tycheposon integrases and those of other MGEs, viruses, bacteria, and archaea 45 reveal that the former form a monophyletic clade, more closely related to each other than to integrases from any other system ( Figure 3 ). This is unexpected because integrases often jump between viruses, MGEs, and hosts, resulting in more convoluted evolutionary histories. 46 Within the tycheposons, the integrases further cluster by the different tRNA genes they target. Each island has its specific, proximal tRNA and each tRNA its specific integrase; i.e., integrases are island specific. Moreover, based on our phylogenetic tree, tycheposon integrases account for more than 10% of the integrase diversity across various domains of life ( Figure 3 ) (see STAR Methods for tree-based diversity estimation), supporting their ancient origin, and suggesting that the tycheposons carrying them evolved independently over similar timescales.
In addition to an integrase module (∼1 kbp) encoding the integrase and sometimes an excisionase, many tycheposons carry genes associated with replication (2–4 kb modules with polymerases, primases, and/or helicases) ( Figure 1 ; Table S4 ); 44% of tycheposons with clear boundaries (i.e., flanked by attachment sites on both sides) carry diverse replicative helicases, with the most common types belonging to helicase superfamily 4 (RecA-fold, cd01125; rarely DnaB-like, cd00984) and superfamily 3 (VirE-like, PF05272). We also observed some members of helicase superfamily 6 (MCM-like, COG1241). Moreover, 15% of the tycheposons also carry a putative multifunctional primase-polymerase domain (PrimPol, cd04859), either on a gene adjacent to, or fused with, the helicase. These multifunctional primase-polymerase domains suggest that at least some tycheposons have the potential to self-synthesize. This would make them the second group of prokaryotic transposons with such a capability after casposons, which encode a protein-primed type B DNA polymerase. 47 , 48
Site-specific integrases and autonomous replication are not uncommon in MGEs, but they are typically associated with either eukaryotic elements 49 or large prokaryotic elements with distinctive lifestyles: lysogenic phages, which encode their own capsids; plasmids, which typically exist as extrachromosomal DNA molecules; and ICEs, which encode conjugation machinery that enable them to move between cells. 50 , 51 Tycheposons lack these complex functional traits and, based on their hallmark functions and overall genomic organization resemble viral satellites 52 —parasitic MGEs that depend on a helper phage for replication/mobilization, such as PICIs 36 , 53 , 54 (first described as SaPIs 55 ) and PICI-like elements (PLEs). 56 Although phage satellites have recently been reported to be present in a considerable proportion of marine virus particles, the Prochlorococcus tycheposons reported here appear to be distinct from those that are found as concatemers in marine virus particles. 57
The resemblance is particularly noticeable for a subset of “satellite tycheposons” (82 out of 501) which, despite not sharing genes with recognizable homology with PICIs, carry the same functional types of apparent phage-hijacking genes: either a predicted major capsid protein, a building block of a phage capsid, or a small terminase subunit, a part of the protein complex that pumps phage DNA into newly formed phage capsids ( Figure 1 B). Given this analogy in predicted structure and function (and supported by their prevalence in viral metagenomes—see below), we expect these tycheposons also to be viral satellites, exhibiting a lifestyle similar to that of PICIs—i.e., they reactivate from the host genome during phage infection, replicate, potentially interfere with the replication of the phage, and hijack newly produced phage capsids in order to spread to other cells, ultimately providing population-level resistance against phage predation. Interestingly, however, we never observed satellite tycheposons with additional cargo genes, while this appears to be common in PICIs. 36
The majority of tycheposons in our dataset (419 out of 501) lack genes for viral packaging or interference and instead carry cargo of often up to 10 kbp (out of 213 tycheposons with clear boundaries: 80% carrying >2 kb of cargo, 42% carrying >10 kb of cargo) that appears to reflect abiotic selection pressures of the local environment ( Figure 1 A). In many cases, the cargo of these tycheposons is composed of genes of unknown function—a standing challenge for the annotation of wild microbes. 58 The genes we could annotate, however, revealed a broad spectrum of functions associated with ecologically relevant processes—in particular, nutrient acquisition. Remarkably, those functions include the three key nutrients that limit primary productivity in the global oceans: nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron 59 ( Figure 1 A). For example, we found complete multigene assimilation pathways for nitrate, phosphate, phosphite, and siderophore-mediated iron uptake—complex metabolic traits often encoded in the syntenic regions of the core genome of other bacteria and basal Prochlorococcus clades 31 , 60 —captured in tycheposons, turning them into mobile units with the potential to boost the fitness of streamlined Prochlorococcus genomes that had lost these traits in environments where a particular nutrient is a strong selective agent. These findings underpin the possible role of tycheposons in accelerating microbial adaptation and genome evolution, especially with respect to key metabolic traits, which are typically thought to be more rarely gained and lost.
To determine whether tycheposons were specific to Prochlorococcus or might be a feature of genomically streamlined ocean microbes, we examined over 2,000 of other marine bacterial genomes for similar elements. This search revealed related elements with genes falling within the tycheposon-specific gene-sharing network in a wide variety of bacterial groups, including Alpha-, Gamma- and Deltaproteobacteria ( Figure 5 C), where they potentially play similar roles in promoting genomic plasticity and adaptability.
Evidence of activity and mobility Based on genomic data, tycheposons and cryptic elements also appeared highly transient; i.e., they were gained and lost—presumably through integration and excision—within time frames exceeding the resolution of our genome collection: 62% of MGEs were unique and therefore only present in a single genome. About 26% were present in two to five (and in rare cases up to 25) closely related genomes likely representing a single integration event in a common ancestor and subsequent vertical inheritance; 12% were present in at least two distantly related genomes, indicating independent transfer events. This high diversity and patchy distribution suggest a dynamic system with a large pool of elements that transiently visit the islands, thereby greatly contributing to intrapopulation heterogeneity ( Figure S3 A). (Elements were defined as the same if they shared at least 90% identity over 50% of the shorter element; we did not factor in location because independent integrations will occur at the same tRNA due to the site-specificity of the integrase.)
To get a more detailed picture of the activity of tycheposons, we turned to cultures of Prochlorococcus strain MIT0604, which is particularly interesting as it contains 7 MGEs (4 tycheposons and 3 cryptic elements). Two of these tycheposons share 100% sequence identity and encode the complete gene cluster for the assimilation of nitrate 31 , 60 ( Figure S4 C), a nutrient that often limits primary productivity in ocean ecosystems. 61 We exploited the fact that we had maintained this strain through serial transfer in two separate liquid cultures for 10 years: one propagated on media with NH 4 + as the only N source, the other on the same media but with NO 3 − as the only N source. The latter culture was sequenced shortly after separation in 2011, and then both independent cultures were sequenced again in 2019. Comparison of the three genomes revealed significant genomic rearrangements, all of which centered around the tycheposons: we observed gain, loss, and duplication of tycheposons, as well as an associated chromosomal inversion between two identical copies of the nitrate-assimilation cluster they carry ( Figure 4 ). Because the tycheposon attachment sites reside within genomic islands, the modifications were confined to islands, while the rest of the genome remained unaltered. Importantly, the rearrangements also point to the selective advantage provided by tycheposons carrying cargo with adaptive metabolic functions: the most conspicuous changes were linked to the tycheposon containing the nitrate-assimilation gene cluster when cultures were maintained with NO 3 − as the sole N source. That is, the cargo metabolic function—nitrate assimilation—has become an independent “plug-in” cassette that can be duplicated under selective pressure (NO 3 − , in this case), lost when useless (if NH 4 + is the only N source), and in the wild, likely also more flexibly transferred between cells than would be a core genome trait.
We also looked for evidence of tycheposon and cryptic element mobility in four additional tycheposon-containing Prochlorococcus strains, based on PCR amplification of the circular and excised element intermediates. We found that all cultures were internally heterogeneous, with subpopulations of cells missing elements that excised or possessed tandem repeat junctions ( Figures S4 A and S4B) indicating that stochastic excision and integration events do occur.
To better understand what conditions would trigger tycheposon mobility, we measured the transcriptional response of an integrase associated with a cargo-carrying tycheposon in MIT0604 to a wide range of stressors ( Figure S5 A)—some of which a cell might experience in the environment and others artificial. The only significant relative increase in transcripts occurred in response to mitomycin C, a DNA-alkylating agent commonly used to trigger DNA damage, and well known to induce prophage excision. The mitomycin C treatment also induced other integrases in other strains ( Figure S5 B) and triggered detectable mobilization of some tycheposons and cryptic elements ( Figure S4 B), showing that the effect is not specific to the MIT0604 strain.
Further, a genome-wide transcriptome analysis of MIT0604 ( Figure S5 C) revealed that most integrases, putative excisionases, and replication genes all had elevated transcripts when subjected to mitomycin C, indicating a universal regulatory mechanism. We note that other DNA damaging treatments ( Figure S5 A), including UV shock, which is a known source of DNA damage in the surface ocean, 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 did not significantly increase relative transcript abundance of the integrase ( Figure S5 C). This suggests something distinctive about the mitomycin C inhibitory mechanism, which we suspect lies in its ability to cause lethal DNA crosslinks 67 , 68 that lead to replication fork arrests. Thus we postulate that this tight regulatory mechanism would ensure that mobility genes remain mostly silent, avoiding the toxicity generally linked to their activity 50 , 69 and are only induced in a fraction of the population, 70 even in times of stress such as nutrient starvation or high UV exposure.
Tycheposons in viral capsids and extracellular vesicles Next, we asked how tycheposons might move from cell to cell in the dilute oceans. We first looked at viral particles as potential vectors by screening viral-fraction metagenomic libraries from ocean samples where Prochlorococcus is abundant. Previous work leveraging single-molecule nanopore sequencing provided evidence for PLEs packaged as concatemers in virus-like particles in the open ocean. 71 Further examination of both viral-fraction long nanopore reads 71 and short-read contigs 72 , 73 also revealed an abundance of satellite tycheposons, supporting our hypothesis that their phage-like packaging genes enable them to hijack phage capsids, promoting their dissemination and leading to the observed prevalence in marine viral metagenomes ( Figures 5 A and 5B). This postulate is further supported by most recent work showing that viral satellites including tycheposons are abundant within virus particles from marine plankton of the photic zone. 57
We could not, however, identify cargo-carrying tycheposons, which lack phage-packaging genes, in the viral fraction samples, suggesting alternative transfer routes and motivating us to look elsewhere. We wondered if extracellular vesicles, known to contain DNA and to be released by Prochlorococcus and other marine microbes, 74 might serve as vectors. Comparing vesicle- and cellular-fraction metagenomic data from seawater, we observed a specific enrichment of almost all predicted tycheposon hallmark genes in vesicles compared with cells ( Figure 6 ). Similarly, most segments of tRNAs acting as tycheposon attachment sites were also significantly enriched over other tRNA segments in vesicles. Unfortunately, we could not ascertain whether tycheposons in vesicles include cargo-carrying elements, because for the vesicle fraction we lack long-read data that can capture complete elements and our short-read data were too diverse and shallow to assemble into contigs. Nevertheless, the specific enrichments of both of these features strongly suggest that vesicles serve as a common means of dispersal for these MGEs, thereby casting new light on the importance of vesicles as vectors for horizontal gene transfer in microbial communities.
Tycheposons as accelerators of genomic island formation Finally, we investigated the broader impact of tycheposons on Prochlorococcus ’ genome organization and evolution. The clear co-localization of tycheposons and genomic islands—right next to the same seven tRNA genes—prompted us to further explore the underlying mechanisms of genomic island formation and possible connections to tycheposons integration ( Figure 7 ).
One simple explanation would have been that islands in their entirety were made up of tycheposons (and possibly other MGEs). Such additive islands form through the accumulation of consecutively integrating MGEs at the same integration site. 75 Indeed, we found a few cases of multiple tycheposons located right next to each other, separated only by a partial copy of the island-tRNA (for example, MIT9202 and AG-355-A09 in Figure S6 A). In addition, we also identified remnants of degenerated MGEs, such as fragmented integrases and more partial tRNAs scattered throughout the islands, suggestive of additional, older integration events.
However, with an average of 8–10 islands but only 1–2 MGEs per genome (tycheposons plus cryptic elements), most individual genomic islands did not contain any MGEs, and those that did were often much larger than the MGEs they contained ( Figure S2 ). Overall, we found that putatively active MGEs (with clear boundaries and obvious degeneration) only made up 3.6% of the total island material. Partial and degenerated elements, which lack clear boundaries and are harder to delineate from surrounding material, appear to account for a similar fraction, based on similar numbers of hallmark genes present in both element and nonelement parts of islands. Thus, the major fraction of the islands appears not to be made up of tycheposons or cryptic elements but rather of additional transferred material.
We therefore wondered how this additional material was brought in and, in particular, why it appears to accumulate next to the tycheposon integration sites. Genomic plasticity, especially in the absence of MGEs, is typically associated with the exchange of material through homologous recombination. Homologous recombination can maintain presence/absence patterns in islands and can even play an important role in purging parasitic MGEs from genomes. 76 It can also lead to the emergence of variable genomic islands at specific locations. 77 , 78 In these cases, island-flanking core genes act as recombination anchors showing clearly elevated recombination rates. Looking for such patterns in Prochlorococcus , however, did not reveal elevated recombination rates in island-flanking regions ( Figure S7 ). Thus, while homologous recombination likely plays a role in maintaining within-island variability, it does not seem to provide a good explanation as to why islands are forming specifically next to island tRNA genes.
Instead, we postulate that the additional island material is also acquired through site-specific recombination carried out by transiently visiting tycheposons. Specifically, we hypothesize that the material is brought in as flanking material temporarily captured onto a tycheposon by imprecise excision from a donor genome, comparable with specialized transduction in lysogenic phages. 17 , 79 After integration into the recipient genome, the subsequent precise excision of the tycheposon would leave the transferred flanking material behind in its new host. Over time, such a process would lead to the accretion of material on one side of tycheposon-targeted tRNAs, and thus the formation of islands ( Figure 7 B).
Support for this model of island formation comes from three distinct observations: (1) we did find full-length tycheposons in viral metagenomes carrying sequences that appear to be adjacent host material ( Figure 5 A); (2) most islands exhibit a distinct polarity with content diversity being highest at the proximal end next to the tRNA where we expect new material to be added ( Figure S6 A); and (3) we observe a clear correlation between the size of islands (excluding MGEs) and the prevalence of tycheposons in these islands—consistent with the prediction that the more often an island is frequented by tycheposons, the more often flanking material can be mobilized via specialized transduction, leading to an increase in island size ( Figure S6 B).
As a consequence, Prochlorococcus tRNA-associated islands appear to comprise two gene pools with different transfer and turnover rates: element genes—which include hallmark genes for integration and replication as well as cargo genes—and island genes that are not part of a functional element. Element genes are highly mobile and can be gained and lost dynamically to match selective pressures quickly. Island genes apparently still have higher rates of transfer than core genes but appear to rely on more stochastic processes such as the co-transfer of element-flanking material or recombination with active elements. Moreover, a strong overlap in enriched functions between elements and adjacent island regions ( Figure S3 B) supports the idea that cargo carried on tycheposons can become part of the nonelement parts of islands, for example, due to degradation of the carrier element or captured onto elements via recombination processes.
Moreover, because the integrases determine which island a tycheposon will integrate into, the pool of tycheposons is also partitioned into subpopulations that affect different islands. This mechanism has the potential to control which tycheposons and flanking genomic regions are more likely to recombine. It has previously been shown that different genes of similar ecological functions appear to occur in the same islands across different strains. 1 , 3 The island specificity of tycheposons could be one important factor for promoting this differentiation of islands with respect to broader ecological themes.
In summary, we conclude that the majority of material in Prochlorococcus islands is not derived from tycheposons directly but rather appears to have been brought in by them as flanking material, suggesting that this type of horizontal transfer is crucial to the island-formation process. While genomic data is not direct evidence for tycheposon-driven island formation via transduction, the observed island features—the sharp island delineation at tRNA genes, accretion of horizontally acquired material at the distal end of the islands (the end furthest from the island tRNA) and the increase of island size with increased MGE activity—provide strong support. In this model, the tRNAs function as landing sites and the transient MGEs as vectors, gradually contributing to the accumulation of transferred material and, thus, the formation of large, persistent islands.
Discussion Given that their streamlined genomes generally lack canonical modes of horizontal gene transfer, the mechanisms generating the diverse pangenomes of oligotrophic marine bacteria have been elusive. Using genomic, experimental, and field data, we present evidence that a unique set of MGEs—which we named tycheposons—is involved in creating this diversity. Tycheposons can carry functional modules that appear to be important for niche differentiation among subpopulations of cells, such as genes involved in the uptake of nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron—the three key nutrients limiting primary productivity in the global ocean 59 and important agents of natural selection over this vast ecosystem. 80
A subset of the tycheposons appear to be viral satellites similar to PICIs 36 , 37 and are the first of their kind described in cyanobacteria. The different evolutionary histories of tycheposon and PICI genes and, in particular, their integrases suggest that their structural similarity could have arisen from convergent evolution. It is unclear whether satellite tycheposons were initially introduced in a Prochlorococcus ancestor and diverged into the larger family of cargo-carrying tycheposons, or if cargo-carrying tycheposons acquired phage-interference genes. Regardless, all tycheposons are interconnected by a shared set of integrases and replication genes. That the two broad functional categories of tycheposons involve both relief from growth limitation and mortality defense is elegant in its ecological simplicity.
The role of tycheposons appears to go beyond just the function of their cargo and places them at the center of a system for the formation and remodeling of Prochlorococcus’ largest reservoir of variability—its genomic islands. Genes present in and near genomic islands suggest that the horizontally acquired regions that are not part of tycheposons were brought in with them. Moreover, tycheposons appear to facilitate rearrangements inside islands, promoting the genomic diversity that is characteristic of the population structure of Prochlorococcus cells in the wild, where hundreds to thousands of subpopulations varying by small gene cassettes co-exist. 5 , 6 Similar processes have been reported for Prochlorococcus ’ sister taxon, marine Synechoccoccus , in which tycheposons appear to be involved in the diversification of pigment types. 81 This potential to accelerate their hosts’ differentiation and adaptation implicates tycheposons as important contributors to the ocean-wide stability of microbial populations such as the Prochlorococcus collective. 7
Our metagenomic analysis of wild populations further shows that tycheposons are contained within both phage capsids and membrane vesicles, implicating these structures in the movement of tycheposons among cells. As particles that can diffuse through seawater, vesicles and phages are well suited to transport and deliver genetic information between microbial cells. Vesicle-mediated horizontal gene transfer—i.e., vesiduction 82 —occurs in diverse microbial systems 83 , 84 , 85 , 86 , 87 , 88 , 89 and may mediate exchanges between more distantly related taxa than do viruses, 90 which frequently exhibit narrow host ranges. 91 Given the abundance of vesicles in the oceans 74 and our evidence that they are enriched with tycheposons, we propose that vesicles are important vectors for the dispersal of these MGEs in marine ecosystems.
Tycheposons have left their signatures all over the genomes of marine microbes, implicating themselves as important agents of microbial diversification and adaptation. Though much remains to be learned about tycheposon mobilization, replication, and transfer, their potential for shaping the genetic structure of marine microbial populations opens an exciting new area of inquiry, shedding new light on the processes that govern evolution across the vast oligotrophic oceans and beyond.
Limitations of the study Many of our findings are based on the analysis of big genomics data. These data provide an unprecedented window into the genomes of marine microbes and allow us to unveil large-scale patterns and correlations across a vast system. However, they do not provide insights into the underlying dynamics and mechanisms. While we have learned much about the activity and mobility of tycheposons from the stress- and lab-evolution experiment, other aspects remain elusive: we do not yet know how satellite tycheposons respond to infection with phages. Currently, we lack cultured phages able to infect Prochlorococcus cultures carrying satellite tycheposons. Similarly, while we do observe tycheposons in vesicles, we still lack knowledge about how they might be packaged into these particles and transferred into other cells. Finally, while the presence of key nutrient-uptake genes implies importance for adaptation and fitness, we have yet to confirm such effects through direct observations, for example, through chemostat experiments.
STAR★Methods Experimental model and subject details Strain isolation Prochlorococcus strain MIT1013 was isolated from seawater obtained on the BiG-RAPA (Biogeochemical Gradients – Role in Arranging Planktonic Assemblages) expedition aboard the R/V Melville (MV1015) during the late austral spring of 2010 (18 November 2010 – 14 December 2010). Seawater was collected at Station 7 (Latitude: -26.25; Longitude -104) using a Niskin bottle rosette (Cast 68, 10 December 2010, 15:03 GMT) from a depth of 150m, corresponding to the subsurface chlorophyll maximum. Seventeen mL of seawater was aliquoted into an acid-washed 28 mL screw cap polycarbonate tube and amended with 20 μM ammonium chloride, 1 μM sodium phosphate, 1 mM sodium bicarbonate, 0.117 μM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 0.117 μM iron (III) chloride, 0.009 μM manganese (II) chloride, 0.0008 μM zinc (II) sulfate, 0.0005 μM cobalt (II) chloride, 0.0003 μM sodium molybdate, 0.001 μM sodium selenite, and 0.001 μM nickel (II) chloride. The MIT1013 strain has been deemed unialgal based on observations of a single Prochlorococcus population using flow cytometry and by the presence of a single 16S–23S rRNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequence as determined by direct sequencing of its ITS PCR amplicon. The complete genome sequence of MIT1013 was additionally determined. Cells were grown to mid-exponential phase and pelleted by centrifugation.
Culture conditions Prochlorococcus cells (axenic cultures, except for MIT1013 and PAC1, and MIT0604 when specified) were grown under constant light flux (30–40 μmol photons m−2 s−1) at 24°C in natural seawater-based Pro99 medium containing 0.2-μm-filtered Sargasso Sea water, amended with Pro99 nutrients (N, P, and trace metals). 141 Growth was monitored using bulk culture fluorescence measured with a 10AU fluorometer (Turner Designs).
Two independently growing cultures of MIT0604: the 'nitrate-culture' corresponds to regular Pro99 media culture described above, while the 'ammonia-culture' was grown in Pro99 media with the 800 μM ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) omitted and replaced by 800 μM sodium nitrate (NaNO3), leaving ammonium as the only nitrogen source.
Prochlorococcus isolate strains used in this study. HOTS: Hawaii Ocean Time Series station, Pacific oligotrophic gyre. Strain Clade Location of isolation, depth Reference MIT0604 HLII HOTS, 175m Biller et al. 20 MIT9202 HLII Tropical Pacific, 79m Thompson et al. 92 MIT9312 HLII Gulf Stream, 135m Coleman et al. 1 MIT9215 HLII Equatorial Pacific, surface Kettler et al. 26 SB HLII Western Pacific, 40m Shimada et al. 93 PAC1 LLI HOTS, 100m Penno et al. 94 MIT1013 LLI Eastern South Pacific Subtropical Gyre, 150m This study MIT1306 LLIV HOTS, 150m Cubillos-Ruiz et al. 95
Method details Genomic datasets Prochlorococcus genomes For our analyses, we selected a set of 623 publicly available Prochlorococcus genome assemblies, 73 obtained from cultured isolates, 540 generated through single-cell sequencing and 10 extracted from metagenome assemblies ( Table S1 ). We quality-screened the assemblies using checkm v1.0.7. 97 The selected assemblies have a minimum completeness of 25% and median completeness of 74%; isolates and single-cell genomes have less than 4% contamination, metagenome-assembled genomes less than 8%. Raw assemblies are available through public databases such as NCBI Genbank, the reference-scaffolded assemblies with our lifted annotations are available from GitHub ( https://github.com/thackl/pro-tycheposons ) and Zenodo ( https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4642441 ).
Global Ocean Reference Genomes (GORG) Tropics This dataset consists of 12,715 single amplified genomes (SAGs) of Bacteria and Archaea, which were obtained through a randomized cell selection from 28 globally distributed samples of tropical and subtropical, epipelagic ocean water. 24 GORG-Tropics SAGs represent all major lineages of surface ocean prokaryoplankton. Used as a reference database, GORG-Tropics recruits an average of 40% reads from tropical and subtropical epipelagic metagenomes with >95% nucleotide identity. The dataset can be accessed at https://osf.io/pcwj9 and https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB33281 .
Vesicle-fraction metagenomes We generated paired metagenomes from the cellular and vesicle/small particle fractions of four oligotrophic water samples. All samples were collected at Station ALOHA (22.75 °N, 158 °W) in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre on cruises HOT263 (June 2014; 5m depth) and HOT283 (April 2016; 5m, 25m, and 137m depth). Each set of samples was derived from a total of ∼100-200 L of water retrieved from Niskin bottles. For cellular metagenomes, 3-6 L of water was filtered onto a 0.2 μm Sterivex filter (Millipore) and preserved. As previously described in Biller et al., 142 DNA was later extracted using a phenol/chloroform-based extraction. Lysing Matrix E beads (MP Biomedicals), 400 ul Phenol:Chloroform:IAA (25:24:1) and 400 ul 2x TENS buffer (100 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0, 40 mM EDTA, 200 mM NaCl, 2% SDS for 2x buffer) were added to a microcentrifuge tube containing the filter and then vigorously agitated using a beadbeater for 40 seconds. After spinning at 19,000 xg for 5 minutes, the aqueous phase was transferred into a Phase Lock Gel tube (5 Prime), mixed with an equal volume of chloroform, and then spun at ∼27,000 x g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was removed and mixed with an equal volume of AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter), and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. Beads were washed twice with 75% ethanol, dried, and resuspended in 20 uL ultrapure glass distilled water (Teknova). Total DNA yield was quantified using the PicoGreen assay (ThermoFisher) with yields ranging from ∼10-2600 ng total DNA.
The <0.2 μm fraction of the remaining water was concentrated on a 100 kDa tangential flow filter and further fractionated using an Optiprep gradient; vesicle-enriched fractions were identified, DNA outside the vesicles removed using TURBO DNAse, and the remaining DNA (presumably within vesicles) was extracted as previously described 74 : Vesicles were lysed in GES buffer (50 mM guanidinium thiocyanate, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.005% (w/v) sarkosyl; final concentration) at 37 °C for 30 minutes. DNA was purified using DNA Clean & Concentrator-5 columns (Zymo Research) per the manufacturer’s instructions, using a 5:1 ratio of DNA binding buffer, and eluted in ultrapure water. Sequencing libraries for the purified cellular and vesicle/particle-associated DNA were prepared from ∼1 ng of DNA using the NextEra XT kit (Illumina) and 150+150nt paired-end sequences generated by an Illumina NextSeq 500 at the MIT BioMicro Center. All data are available from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRP272691).
Tara Oceans viral-fraction metagenome contigs The short-read viral data were obtained from 131 samples collected during the Tara Oceans and Tara Oceans Polar Circle expeditions and span water layers from the surface (5m deep) to the mesopelagic ocean (up to 1000m deep). The full description of the collection locations and depths as well as the viral enrichment, DNA sequencing, and contig assembly protocols for these samples can be found in the methods section of the Global Ocean Viromes 2.0 (GOV2.0) dataset. 72 GOV2.0’s deep ocean samples from the Malaspina expedition (n=14) were not included in this study. All the assembled contigs from the 131 Tara samples were screened for tycheposons prior to any bioinformatic viral selection carried out in Gregory et al. 72 to establish the GOV2.0 dataset. These assembled contigs can be accessed through the Data Commons portal of iVirus under GOV2.0 (filename: Tara_assemblies.tar.gz)
Station ALOHA viral-fraction nanopore reads The 25 m deep sample was collected on the HOT-314 cruise on August 5, 2019 at Station ALOHA (22°45’ N, 158° W; http://hahana.soest.hawaii.edu/hot/ ). Sample collection, filtration, viral concentration, extraction, and sequencing have all been previously described. 71 Briefly, the seawater was pre-filtered by peristaltic pumping through a 0.22 um filter (Sterivex GV) then concentrated by tangential flow filtration (TFF) over a 30 kDa filter (Biomax 30 kDa) membrane, catalog #: P3B030D01, Millipore). Following multiple rounds of centrifugal concentration, lysis and DNA purification were performed in a single tube using the Qiagen Genomic-tip 20/G protocol following manufacturer’s recommendations. Virus-enriched samples from 110 L of 0.22um pre-filtered seawater yielded a total of 3.2 μg of purified, high molecular weight DNA. Sequencing was conducted on a GridION X5 with FLO-MIN106 (R 9.4.1) flowcells (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Ltd.). The resulting 701,515 reads were basecalled using Guppy v3.0.4, generating 10.38Gb of sequencing data with a read N50 length of 29.70 Kb. All data are available from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRX7079550).
Computational analyses Gene prediction and ortholog detection To ensure consistent gene annotations, all 623 Prochlorococcus genomes (see section Genomic datasets for details) were reannotated using PROKKA v1.12-beta. 98 The annotated genes were clusters into groups of orthologs using panX sha-0a4dfce 99 with customized settings to account for the incompleteness of the single-cell genomes in the collection: core genes are defined by being present in at least 70% of all genomes and in every genome of >98% completeness (-cg 0.70 -csf strains_complete_98plus.txt).
Phylogenetic tree reconstruction The phylogenetic reference tree for all 623 Prochlorococcus genomes analyzed was constructed using the maximum likelihood method from 109 concatenated single-copy core proteins. The markers were identified using HMMER3 v3.2.1 100 based on the 120 TIGRFAM 143 profiles previously described as ubiquitous bacterial single-copy core genes (“bac120”). 144 11 proteins found to be not single-copy in this specific data set were excluded. Sequence files were manipulated with seqkit v10.2 101 and individual protein alignments were generated with mafft v7.310, 102 trimmed with trimAl v1.4 103 (-gappyout), and concatenated with msa-concatenate ( https://github.com/thackl/phylo-scripts/ , sha-2334c67). The maximum likelihood phylogeny was inferred with FastTree v2.1.10. 104 The tree was rooted at the LLIV clade and visualized using the R packages phytools 105 and ggtree v2.5.0. 106
Reference-based genome-scaffolding All 34 complete genomes comprising only a single contig were considered as references. For better comparability, all reference genomes were oriented and rotated – they are circular chromosomes – to start with the origin of replication near the dnaN gene on the plus strand. This is consistent with the convention used for most published Prochlorococcus genomes. OriC prediction was performed with the command line version of Ori-Finder v1.0 107 with dnaA box sequence set to "TTTTCCACA" as suggested for cyanobacteria. 145 The start positions of 11 genomes were adjusted, and 3 of them were also reverse complemented. For all other genomes, the closest reference genome was determined by the smallest cophenetic distance in the reference phylogenetic tree described above. For each pair of draft genome and closest reference, 1x1 anchor maps were created by matching genes belonging to the same cluster of orthologous genes (see above). These anchor maps were used to orient and order contigs in a way that maximizes collinearity using ALLMAPS v0.7.7. 108 If necessary the contig spanning the beginning and end of the reference sequence was split into two parts at the position of the dnaN gene. Gaps between contigs were estimated by minimizing the sum of absolute distances between corresponding genes from the 1x1 map. Contigs were weighted by the log of their length and minimum gap size was set to 100bp. The optimization was implemented using the "L-BFGS-B" method in R v3.5.1. 109 See section Prochlorococcus genomes for access to the data.
Genomic island predictions To automate the annotation of genomic islands across the entire dataset, we devised an HMM-based approach that uses frequencies of orthologous genes as input. We define the frequency of a gene and its respective orthogroup, as the number of strains the gene is present in. Duplications within the same genome are ignored. We are working off the observation that islands are enriched in non-core genes, and hence their composition in terms of gene frequencies is different from non-island regions. 1 We used previously described genomic islands from 2 Prochlorococcus HLI strains (MED4, MIT9515), 2 Prochlorococcus HLII strains (MIT9312, MIT9215), 1 Prochlorococcus LLII strain (SS120) and 1 Prochlorococcus LLIV strain (MIT9313) 1 , 3 , 146 to generate four profiles of the island and non-island gene frequencies. Based on comparisons of these profiles we then defined different states for the HMM: core, flex, and inconclusive depending on their prevalence in or outside of islands. Using the R-package HMM v1.0 110 we built four HMMs with two hidden states (island, non-island). Start, transition, and emission probabilities were estimated from the literature annotations. For all genomes, each gene was assigned the category (core, flex, and inconclusive) depending on the gene frequency as described above. Using these labels in the order they appear on the scaffolded sequence (see above) as observations the Viterbi algorithm was applied to predict the hidden state for each gene (island, non-island). This gene-level resolution of genomic islands was used in further analyses.
We first reference-scaffolded and reorganized all assemblies to obtain single-chromosome scaffolds with consistent start and orientation. Using coordinates of known genomic islands 1 , 3 , 146 and abundances of orthologous gene clusters 99 we trained a Hidden-Markov-Model to predict islands across all genomes ( Figure S1 A).
Searches for known mobile genetic elements Initially, we screened for the presence of common MGEs using similarity searches (HMMER3, 100 MMseq2 111 ) against a comprehensive collection of MGE protein and profile databases (NCBI viral RefSeq, NCBI Plasmid RefSeq, ACLAME, ICEBerg, COMPASS, immedb, and ISfinder, pVOG 42 ). Moreover, we ran automated annotation tools (VirSorter2, 112 IslandViewer4 113 ). However, none of these searches returned clear hits except to some already known transposons and insertion sequences in LLIV Prochlorococcus . After identifying putative horizontally transferred sequences based on genomic island annotations, we used remote homology detection with HHPred/HHSearch v3.1.0 30 , 114 to assign functional predictions to otherwise unannotated genes.
Identification of in mobilome hallmark genes To enable a comprehensive Prochlorococcus -focused search for integrative MGEs we compiled and curated protein HMM-profiles of genes typically found in candidate MGEs using an iterative, explorative approach: Starting with a handful of manually annotated high-confidence MGE candidates we identified relevant orthogroups (see section Gene prediction and ortholog detection) based on one of the two following criteria: a) orthogroups with some annotations associated with the excision-replication-packaging life-cycle typical for MGEs (integrases, primases, helicases, capsid genes, terminases), and b) orthogroups appearing in multiple candidates with syntenically conserved patterns.
From these orthogroups we created and curated, redundancy-reduced alignments and HMM-profiles using combinations of the following tools: mafft v7.310, 102 msa-trim ( https://github.com/thackl/phylo-scripts/ , sha-2334c67), AliView, 115 FastTree v2.1.10, 104 FigTree, 116 and HMMER3 v3.2.1. 100 Orthogroups with good reciprocal hits in all-versus-all comparisons and overall consistent multiple sequence alignment, when aligned all together, were merged. We then scanned all annotated proteins of our collection of 623 Prochlorococcus genomes using these profiles and rudimentary versions of the R-scripts described in more detail in the next section. We identified, ranked and visualized genomic regions with multiple hits to different hallmark genes within close proximity to each other (multiple hits within a 10-20kb window). From the thus obtained highest ranking clusters we selected new high-confidence candidates and used those together with previously selected candidates to repeat the identification of hallmark genes, expand the overall size of the gene set and refine the existing profiles.
In addition to curating profiles for proteins often found in putative MGEs in Prochlorococcus , we also added generic Pfam profiles 147 with a strong overlap to some of the other hallmark profiles and gathered proteins from four sets of published PICIs. 38 , 37 , 36 , 56 We grouped these genes into clusters based on the annotations provided in the respective publications, manually curated the alignments, and merged clusters into single profiles if they had good reciprocal hits in all-vs-all comparisons and consistent multiple sequence alignment when aligned together.
Automated mobilome detection and annotation Ultimately we devised a small pipeline to automate the detection of MGEs in genomic data sets. The scripts are available from GitHub ( https://github.com/thackl/pro-tycheposons ) and Zendodo ( https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4642441 ), and perform the following steps: • Gene prediction with prodigal v2.6.3 117 if no annotations are provided • Full-length tRNA annotation with ARAGORN v1.2.38 118 if no external tRNA database is provided • Detection of MGE hallmark genes and viral hallmark genes (VirSorter profiles 148 ) using HMMER3 • Partial tRNA annotations using full-length tRNAs and BLAST+ v2.8.1 119 • Attachment site detection in integrase-flanking regions with BLAST+ • Scoring of candidate MGEs based on the presence of different hallmark genes, attachments sites and tRNAs • Visualization of MGEs using ggplot2 120 and https://github.com/thackl/gggenomes
For this study, we analyzed three datasets with this pipeline: 1) 623 Prochlorococcus genomes 2) 2344 single-cell assemblies of the Global Ocean Reference Genomes (GORG) 3) up to 1000 randomly selected 5-20 kbp long contigs from 262 different viral-fraction samples from Tara Oceans (128,566 contigs in total)
For more information on the datasets, see section Genomic datasets. The results from the analyses are available at GitHub ( https://github.com/thackl/pro-tycheposons ) and Zendodo ( https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4642441 ).
Co-clustering of mobilome hallmark genes To analyze all Prochlorococcus MGEs in the context of known MGEs we used a gene-sharing network approach. 39 , 40 , 41 We sensitively co-clustered all hallmark proteins of the Prochlorococcus mobilome (those with functions related to a mobile life-style: recombination, DNA-replication and packaging) together with • all proteins from NCBI viral RefSeq ( https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq/release/viral/ , accessed 2021-02-05) • all proteins from the mobileOG database – a comprehensive database based on 10 million hallmark proteins sequences of all major classes of MGEs (includes ICEBerg, ACLAME, NCBI Plasmid RefSeq, COMPASS, immedb, and ISfinder and pVOG) 42 • and a comprehensive set of proteins representing phage-inducible chromosomal islands. 36 , 37 , 38 , 56
The clustering was performed with MMseq2 sha-45111b (`easy-cluster --evalue 1e-4 --coverage .7`). 111
We further assigned functions to those clusters by matching them to our manually generated profiles. Overall, the automated clustering process showed good congruence with our manually curated protein clusters, although, we note that a with the simplistic approach of a universally applied cutoff, we cannot capture the different characteristics of the diverse proteins set optimally, as indicated by both collapsed clusters of larger conserved proteins (such as integrases) as well as split clusters in particular for likely fast-evolving short co-factors (such as excisionases). The sequences and clustering results are available at GitHub ( https://github.com/thackl/pro-tycheposons ) and Zenodo ( https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4642441 ).
Construction of gene sharing networks To assess the structure within the mobile gene pool and the relatedness of the MGEs carrying those genes, we constructed two gene sharing networks. Firstly, we generated a simple gene-sharing network based on the manually curated hallmark protein profiles of the Prochlorococcus mobilome. In that network, protein profiles are nodes, and we connect every pair of profiles that co-occur on the same MGE, weighted by how often we observe that co-occurrence. Rare connections (count <3) are ignored. This network provides information about the internal structure of the mobilome, i.e. how many different types (unconnected subgraphs) of MGEs are present in the data.
Secondly, we generated a bipartite network based on automatically generated protein clusters computed from Prochlorococcus’ mobilome plus a comprehensive set of viral and the MGE protein sets. In this network, we have two types of nodes: protein clusters and MGEs/viral genomes. Connections are drawn between MGEs/viral genomes and the proteins they contain. This second network explicitly highlights the delineation of the tycheposons compared to the realm of known MGEs. The networks were generated in R with ggraph v2.0.2. 121
Phylogeny of tyrosine recombinases To put the tyrosine recombinases identified on most of the new tycheposons and cryptic elements into context with previously described integrases, we first compiled a representative set of known recombinase proteins. We used a HMM database of recently described Xer-like tyrosine-recombinases, 35 which was kindly provided to us by the authors, to collect protein sequences from UniRef50 ( https://www.uniprot.org/help/uniref ). We then combined these sequences with a non-redundant subset of the integrase sequences found in our elements (max pairwise identity of 40%). We aligned the sequences with mafft v7.310 102 (--genafpair), computed a phylogenetic tree with FastTree v2.1.10 104 and visualized it with iTOL 122 followed by manual curation. For the comparison of the phylogenetic diversity contributed by the new integrases, we divided the sum of branch length of the new integrase clade by the total sum of branch lengths in the full tree. Before classifying new putative integrases as such, we also checked each subtype alignment for the presence of the characteristic residues at the catalytic sites to gain more confidence in the prediction of their functionality.
Oxford Nanopore genome assembly The assemblies of two independently growing cultures of MIT0604 were generated using wtdbg2 sha-8926622 123 from nanopore reads longer than 50,000 bp for the nitrate-culture and 30,000 bp for the ammonia-culture, respectively. In both cases, a single contig matching the complete chromosome of MIT0604 was obtained and extracted for further analysis from the assembly. The contigs were each reorganised to match the start and orientation of the reference Illumina assembly generated in 2011. The assemblies and read data set were analysed for rearrangements using Geneious, 124 Mauve, 125 minimap2 126 and Ribbon. 127 The processed assemblies are available for download at https://github.com/https://github.com/thackl/pro-tycheposons .
Experimental procedures Oxford Nanopore sequencing Two independent cultures of Prochlorococcus MIT0604 were sequenced using Oxford Nanopore technologies. Samples were prepared following an ultra-long read sequencing protocol, 149 and whole genomes were sequenced using the Rapid sequencing kit (SQK-RAD004) on a MinION sequencer according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Oxford Nanopore).
Prochlorococcus MIT1013 genome sequencing DNA was isolated by phenol/chloroform extraction. 150 PacBio library preparation and sequencing was carried out by the MIT BioMicro Center and the UMass Worcester Medical School’s Deep Sequencing Core Facility. Assembly of PacBio reads was performed using the hierarchical genome assembly process (Protocol = RS_HGAP_Assembly.2) as implemented in SMRT Analysis 2.3.0 128 with the following parameters adjusted: Minimum Polymerase Read Quality = 0.85 and Genome Size = 2000000 bp (default settings were used for all other parameters). A single Prochlorococcus contig was identified as well as a 6513 bp contig most closely related to Marinobacter sp., a common heterotrophic contaminant of xenic cultures of Prochlorococcus . Overlapping ends of the Prochlorococcus contig were identified using BLAST, and the assembled contig was manually circularized. The circular assembly was corrected using the RS_Resequencing.1 protocol in SMRT Analysis 2.3.0 with the following parameters: Minimum Polymerase Read Quality = 0.85 and Consensus Algorithm = Quiver. This genome was deposited with IMG (accession number 2681812904), annotated using IMG Annotation Pipeline version 4, 129 , 130 and included in ProPortal CyCOGs 6.0. 21
RTqPCR of integrase genes Reverse-Transcription qPCR analysis of integrase genes was performed on biological triplicates exposed to the treatment, compared to untreated controls. For RNA preparation, cells were collected by centrifugation (12,000g for 12 min, 20°C) and immediately resuspended in 500 μL of TRI reagent (Zymo Research). RNA was isolated using the Direct-zol RNA MicroPrep kit (Zymo Research) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A DNA removal step was added after elution using the TURBO DNA-free Kit (ThermoFisher). RNA samples were subsequently concentrated using RNA the Clean & Concentrator kit (Zymo Research), followed by reverse transcription using the SuperScript™ III First-Strand Synthesis System (ThermoFisher). Finally, triplicate qPCRs were performed using the QuantiTect Probe PCR Kit (Qiagen) – using the primer sets detailed in Table S5 – and differential gene expression was calculated following the comparative CT (2-DDCT) method, 151 with the expression of gene rnpB as the endogenous reference.
Description of the treatments shown in Figure S5 A: ‘Alteromonas’ = addition of the helper strain Alteromonas MIT1002 96 at 5x10 6 cells mL -1 for 1h; ‘Pyruvate’ = addition of 5 mM pyruvate for 2h; ‘Glucose’ = addition of 5 mM glucose for 2h; ‘Nitrate’ = culture grown in Pro99 media with nitrate substituted to ammonium as the nitrogen source; ‘N starvation’ = cells are washed twice and resuspended in Pro99 media devoid of any nitrogen source, and incubated for 48h, while control cultures are washed but resuspended in replete Pro99; ‘P starvation’ = same process, using Pro99 media devoid of phosphate; ‘Stationary phase’ = cultures are left until they reach the stationary phase, while control cultures are harvested in exponential phase; ‘Metal toxicity’ = trace metals present in Pro99 are added at 5 times their concentration (toxic level) for 1h; ‘Copper’ = addition of CuCl 2 at 100 pM in the culture for 1h; ‘Arsenate’ = addition of Na 3 AsO 4 at 10 μM for 16h; ‘H 2 O 2 ’ = Addition of hydrogen peroxide at 0.5 μM for 1h; ‘DCMU’ = addition of DCMU (Diuron herbicide) at 4 μM for 1h; ‘Chloramphenicol’ = addition of chloramphenicol at 1 μM (lethal dose) for 1h; ‘Ciprofloxacin’ = addition of ciprofloxacin at 1 μM (lethal dose) for 1h 152 ; ‘Mitomycin C’ = addition of mitomycin C at 20 μM (lethal dose) for 2h; ‘Cold shock’ = cultures were cooled to 14°C for 1h; ‘pH 9.3’ = addition of a 0.1 M NaOH solution at 1.4 mM to reach pH 9.3, for 1h; ‘pH 6.5’ = addition of a 0.1M HCl solution to 2.1 mM to reach pH 6.5, for 1h; ‘Dark’ = culture tubes are placed in dark for 1h; ‘High Light’ = culture tubes are placed at a light intensity of 150 μE for 1h; ‘UV shock’ = cells were irradiated at for 30 sec at 254 nm (UV 100 μW cm -2 ) in an uncovered sterile glass petri dish (150 mm diameter) containing 25 mL of culture. Cells were placed back in 25 mL culture tubes inside the incubator for 30 min, while control cultures were subjected to the same conditions, omitting the UV irradiation 153 ; ‘UV acclimation’ = Cultures were acclimated to a light level of 50 μE in diel regime, receiving an extra 2h daily UV at midday from a Rayminder 15W UV lamp shining 302-316 nm UVB (16 in distance from lamp). Control cultures were grown in diel regime at 25 μE light intensity and without UV. RNA was harvested at midday in exponentially growing cultures 65 ; ‘Exogenous DNA’ = 1 μg of pUC19 plasmid DNA was electroporated in concentrated cell samples, 152 which were then left to recover for 24h before RNA extraction. The control cultures were also electroporated in the absence of plasmid DNA.
RNA-sequencing experiments Nine 30 mL cultures of Prochlorococcus MIT0604 strain were grown to exponential phase. 3 cultures were treated with mitomycin C (Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 15 μg mL -1 for 2 hours; 3 cultures were applied a UV shock by irradiating cells at room temperature for 30 s at 254 nm (UV 100 μW cm -2 ) in an uncovered sterile glass Petri dish (150 mm diameter) – then placed back into their initial culture condition for 1h 153 ; the 3 remaining cultures were kept as control with no treatment. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 12 min, 20°C and RNA was extracted using the mirVana microRNA (miRNA) extraction kit (Ambion, Carlsbad, CA, USA). All strand-specific transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) libraries were constructed using the KAPA RNA HyperPrep kit (Illumina) and used the RiboZero kit (Illumina) for ribosomal RNA depletion. Sequencing was carried out on an Illumina NextSeq 500 instrument at the BPF Next-Gen Sequencing Core Facility at Harvard Medical School, with a High-Output 75-cycle kit to obtain Single-Read 75bp reads.
Tycheposon mobility in lab isolates Excision of elements in lab isolates was probed using end-point PCR specific to the chromosomal vacated site ('excised'), or the circular/tandem repeats state of the elements ( Figure S4 ). Primers are listed in Table S5 . 25 mL duplicate cultures were grown to exponential phase and sampled at t 0 (before the addition of mitomycin C) and t 2h (2h post-addition of mitomycin C at 10 μg mL -1 final concentration). For sampling, 10 mL of cells were harvested by centrifugation (7,000 g for 30 min, 20°c), and DNA was extracted using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (Qiagen). PCR reactions were performed using the Quick Load Taq 2X master mix (New England Biolabs) with 2 min elongation time and 52°C annealing temperature. PCR products were directly loaded on 1% agarose gels for visualization. Each band displayed on the figure was checked by Sanger sequencing and corresponded to the expected amplicon.
Quantification and statistical analysis Tycheposon-containing reads in viral-fraction To annotate tycheposon and cryptic element hallmark genes in raw nanopore reads, which have error-rates too high to predict open reading frames, we used a different strategy: We converted the alignments used to generate the HMM-profiles for hallmark genes into a protein reference database and used DIAMOND v0.9.4 131 in long-read mode to align nanopore reads to this database. We then identified and visualized reads with multiple hits to different hallmark genes.
Tycheposon signatures in vesicle- and cellular-fraction To assess the relative abundance of tycheposon and cryptic element hallmark genes in cellular- and vesicle-fraction metagenomes, we recruited reads translated into amino-acid space using orfm v0.7.1 132 with HMMER3 (--evalue 1e-20) to all element hallmark gene profiles and 109 Prochlorococcus core gene profiles. See section Phylogenetic tree reconstruction for Prochlorococcus for details on the generation of the single-copy core marker gene set. We then analyzed the obtained counts for differential abundance with edgeR v3.20. 133 We only considered profiles with a minimum count of 5 in at least two cellular- and two viral-fraction samples. In the absence of replicates, we estimated the dispersion from all core genes across all samples, assuming that this would provide us with a reasonable yet rather conservative estimate. We normalized for library size (method=”TMM”) and tested for differences between the two fractions using the exact test and the dispersion estimated from the core genes.
Differential abundance of attachment sites To assess the abundance of tRNA sequences that might serve as attachment site in the vesicle- and cellular-fraction samples we applied a two-step process: First, we screened for reads with at least one almost exact 39bp match using bbduk v38.16 134 (k=39 edist=2) to a non-redundant reference database of marine tRNA genes we compiled using the GORG single-cell genomes (see section Global Ocean Reference Genomes). We then blasted those reads with settings optimized for short almost exact matches (-task blastn -reward 1 -penalty -4 -gapopen 5 -gapextend 2 -perc_identity 94 -evalue 10e-5) against both 5’ and 3’ halves of all reference tRNAs. We then further analyzed the resulting counts in R: we filtered for a minimum alignment length of 38bp and tested for tRNAs with differentially abundant 5’ and 3’ regions with Fisher’s exact test and the Bonferroni correction to adjust p-values for multiple testing. The resulting count distributions were visualized with ggplot2. 120
Island size and frequency of MGE integration To test if island size correlates with the frequency of tycheposon integrations, we computed the median sizes of the islands adjacent to the 7 tycheposon-targeted tRNA genes excluding integrated MGEs for each Prochlorococcus clade. We then compared these island sizes to the number of observed integrated tycheposons per clade and determined P- and R 2 -values through a linear fit.
Estimation of homologous recombination rates Genomic island formation is often driven by homologous recombination between flanking core genes. 46 , 78 To test if this is also the case for the islands in Prochlorococcus we estimated recombination rates for genomic regions relative to their distance to genomic islands. First, we identified backbone core genes (orthogroups not found in islands) individually for the 5 large monophyletic clades HLI, HLII/VI, LLI, LLII/III and LLIV. We then estimated a proxy for the average distance of each cluster to the closest island across the entire clade. For that, we took the 25% quantile of all gene-to-closest-island distances we obtained from each individual genome. Next, we generated protein alignments for all of those clade-wise clusters with mafft v7.310, 102 mapped back the nucleotide codons onto the amino-acid alignments (msa-codon https://github.com/thackl/phylo-scripts/ ) and trimmed positions with more than 70% gaps with trimAl v1.4 103 (-gt .3). We then concatenated all alignments ordered by their estimated distance to the closest island, with island-flanking genes at the beginning and genes furthest from islands at the end. Finally, we partitioned those clade-wise concatenated alignments into 99999 nucleotide long blocks. For each of those blocks, we estimated recombination rates and related variables using mcorr v20180102, 135 and compared those block-wise results with respect to the proximity of contained genes to genomic islands.
Functional enrichment analysis For the functional enrichment analysis, all genes were split into three sets: backbone, island, elements. Detected hallmark genes and those smaller than 201bp were excluded. The sets are mutually exclusive so genes within elements within islands are only assigned the element category. Pairwise functional enrichment analyses were performed between backbone-element and between backbone-island using the R-package topGO v2.34.0. 136 Significantly enriched GO terms (p<1e-10, only GO terms with at least 100 occurrences are considered) in the two analyses were compared using GOView 137 for each of the GO categories: molecular function, cellular component and biological process.
RNA-sequencing analyses Adapters were trimmed from the raw Illumina data with bbduk v38.16, 154 with settings ktrim=r, k=23, mink=11, hdist=1. Low-quality regions were removed from the adapter-trimmed sequences using bbduk v38.16, 154 with parameters qtrim=rl, trimq=6. The trimmed RNA-seq reads were aligned to a reference file containing the MIT0604 genome (available from https://github.com/https://github.com/thackl/pro-tycheposons/ ) with the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner v0.7.16a-r1181, 138 using the BWA-backtrack algorithm. To determine the number of reads that aligned to each annotated ORF in the “sense” and “antisense” orientations, we parsed the mappings using the HTSeq package v0.11.2 139 with default parameters and the “nonunique all” option. We compiled the counts of reads that aligned to each ORF (excluding rRNAs and tRNAs because library preparation included ribosomal depletion) across replicates. We identified differentially expressed genes using the DESeq2 R package v1.24.0. 140 Using the standard DESeq2 functions and workflow, we normalized samples by library sequencing depth and estimated the dispersion of each gene. Differential expression tests were performed on mitomycin C vs. control and UV shock vs. control comparisons with the Wald test, using a negative binomial generalized linear model. P-values were corrected for multiple testing with the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. As was suggested by the DESeq2 authors, 140 genes with an adjusted p-value of <0.1 were considered to have significantly different expression between a given pair of treatments. We visualized the differential expression results with ggplot2. 120