https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2023.110579
Title: Comparative genomics reveals the acquisition of mobile genetic elements by the plant growth-promoting Pantoea eucrina OB49 in polluted environments
Abstract: Heavy metal-tolerant plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) have gained popularity in bioremediation in recent years. A genome-assisted study of a heavy metal-tolerant PGPB
Pantoea eucrina OB49 isolated from the rhizosphere of wheat grown on a heavy metal-contaminated site is presented. Comparative pan-genome analysis indicated that OB49 acquired heavy metal resistance genes through horizontal gene transfer. On contigs S10 and S12, OB49 has two
arsRBCH operons that give arsenic resistance. On the S12 contig, an arsRBCH operon was discovered in conjunction with the
merRTPCADE operon, which provides mercury resistance. P. eucrina OB49 may be involved in an ecological alternative for heavy metal remediation and growth promotion of wheat grown in metal-polluted soils. Our results suggested the detection of mobile genetic elements that harbour the ars operon and the fluoride resistance genes adjacent to the
mer operon. Introduction The contamination of the aquatic and terrestrial environment by heavy metals and xenobiotic pollutants is highly increasing in the world, especially in the last decade due to industrial development and anthropogenic activity [ 1 ]. Heavy metals are among the toxic elements that can enter the food chain by absorption at the plant roots by a process called translocation [ 2 ]. Plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) that have the potential to tolerate high levels of heavy metals are used in bioremediation [ 3 ]. Therefore, detoxification of soils irrigated by heavy metal contaminated wastewater using heavy metal tolerant PGP bacteria is a necessity as an application that should take place in bioremediation processes.
PGPBs are generally free-living soil bacteria, although they can also be symbiotic with plant roots or endophytic [ 4 ]. The most used group known for their PGP potential are Actinobacteria [ 5 ], Rhizobia [ 6 ], Pseudomonads [ 7 ], Bacillus [ 8 , 9 ], and Enterobacteria, which include the Pantoea genus [ 10 ]. Gavini et al. [ 11 ] first described Pantoea , a genus in the family Erwiniaceae, Pantoea agglomerans serving as the type species. Since then, as other species have been identified, the name has been enlarged [ 12 ]. We found Pantoea agglomearans to be the PGP species that has been investigated and employed the most [ 13–16 ]. They have the ability to solubilize phosphate [ 17 ], fix nitrogen, and produce secondary metabolites, siderophores, and biomolecules helpful for biocontrol [ 18 ].
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) allows bacteria to incorporate advantageous genes into their genomes, which is crucial for bacterial adaptation to changing environments. Horizontally transmitted genes are often grouped into genomic islands, which are required for adaptation to varied habitats. Several mechanisms can promote bacterial adaptive evolution, including horizontally acquired genes, gene duplication-amplification processes, and interactions among various species within communities [ 11 ]. A pan-genome is a complete collection of genes from different strains of a species. Moreover, HGT causes substantial variability in the genes that each strain possesses, and pan-genome studies are commonly employed to examine species evolution and changes in gene function.
Pan-genome analyses identify a group of core genes shared by all strains, accessory genes shared by two or more strains, and unique genes unique to a single strain [ 12 , 13 ]. Bacteria can generally integrate a variety of beneficial genes into their genomes to adapt to varied habitats, resulting in substantial intraspecific genome diversity and genetic redundancy. These accessory genes have a crucial role in responsiveness to environmental changes as part of adaptive evolution. [ 14 ]. Using next-generation sequencing technology, researchers are increasingly moving toward whole-genome sequencing. This technique has enabled scientists to provide comprehensive insights into the genetic determinants and metabolic pathways involved in various life processes and adaptations [ 15 , 16 ].
Many mysteries have been answered as a result of genome annotation and proteogenomic comparisons with other organisms. In this study, Pantoea eucrina OB49 was identified from wheat cultivated on a site polluted by mixed effluents in Algeria's Setif province. In vitro , OB49 demonstrated great tolerance to arsenic, zinc, copper, chromium, and cadmium, as well as the ability to solubilize phosphate in both solid and liquid media and to synthesize siderophores. Furthermore, in the presence of zinc and cadmium, this strain increased shoot length in the seedling test.
This work includes in-vitro and in-silico genome analysis of Pantoea eucrina OB49, emphasizing genetic factors such as mercury and arsenic genes and operons, as well as processes involved in heavy metals tolerance and PGP characteristics. The high tolerance and adaptability of OB49 were explored utilizing Orthovenn2 [ 17 ] and Pan-genome analysis, and Multigeneblast [ 18 ], which allows us to determine the proteins involved in tolerance and alleviating abiotic stress, particularly for mercury and arsenic. These findings prompted us to investigate the relevance of mobile genetic elements (MGEs) in this adaptation. When comparing the proteins of the Pantoea genus, it was found that the P. agglomerans strain P5 [ 19 ], which is commercially used as a biofertilizer is the most similar strain to the OB49 strain in terms of protein clusters. Based on these findings, OB49 might be a prospective bioremediation alternative for heavy-metal-contaminated soils and wastewaters, as well as a biofertilizer candidate.
Material and methods Isolation of bacteria Pantoea eucrina OB49 strain was isolated from the rhizospheric soil of wheat ( Triticum durum ) cultivated in soil irrigated with industrial and municipal wastewater in Setif (36.0972 N, 5.383 E), Algeria. Physico-chemical properties of soil are presented in (Table S1). Serial dilutions of 1 g of rhizospheric soil were carried out in a saline solution (0.85% NaCl ( w / v )) and 1 ml of each dilution was spread on Petri dishes of Tryptic Soy agar medium (TSA, BioLife, Italy), then morphologically distinctive colonies were selected for further experiments.
Heavy metal tolerance test In solid medium To determine the ability of OB49 to tolerate cadmium, copper, arsenic, zinc, and chromium, Inocula of 10 μl of fresh bacterial culture were applied to TSA medium supplemented with increasing concentrations of heavy metals and incubated for 48 h at 30 °C. Serial two-fold dilutions were prepared from stock solutions of heavy metals. Cadmium chloride (CdCl 2 ) concentrations ranged from 0 mg/l to 200 mg/l, Copper chloride (CuCl 2 ), Zinc sulfate (ZnSO 4 ), and potassium dichromate (K 2 Cr 2 O 7 ) from 0 to 1600 mg/l, and disodium hydrogen-arsenate (Na 2 HAsO 4 ) from 0 to 8000 mg/l.
In liquid medium Heavy metal bacterial tolerance was carried out in the Tryptic Soy broth medium (TSB, BioLife, Italy), supplemented with appropriate concentrations of chromium, copper, zinc, and cadmium. Serial dilutions were carried out from stock solution ranging from (0 to 3200 mg/l) for Potassium dichromate K 2 Cr 2 O 7 , Copper chloride (CuCl 2 ), and Zinc sulfate (ZnSO 4 ), from (0 to 320 mg/l) for Cadmium chloride (CdCl 2 ), and disodium hydrogen-arsenate (Na2HAsO4) from (0 to 8000 mg/l) in microplates. The cultures were incubated at 30 °C for 24 h, and the optical density at 600 nm was measured; three independent experiments were performed.
Plant growth-promoting traits The ability of solubilizing inorganic phosphate was investigated by spot inoculation of 10 μl of bacterial suspension on Pikovskaya's agar medium [ 22 ] using tricalcium phosphate Ca 3 O 8 P 2 as substrate. The production of ammonia by OB49 was studied by the inoculation of 100 μl of bacterial suspension on 10 ml of peptone-buffered water and incubated for 48 h at 30 °C. The development of a brown to yellow color after adding 0. 5 ml of Nessler's reagent indicates a positive test for ammonia production [ 25 ].
To test the ability of bacteria for living in medium-free nitrogen, bacterial spots were cultured on a Jensen's medium [ 26 ] and incubated for 7 days at 30 °C. The growth of bacteria on this medium indicates their ability to fix nitrogen. The appearance of a yellow halo on King's B medium overlayed with Chrome azurol S agar after 6 h of incubation indicates a positive test of siderophores production [ 27 ].
Seedlings under heavy metal stress For surface sterilization, wheat seeds were washed and disinfected with 70% ethanol for 15 s, then with a 5% sodium hypochlorite solution for 15 min, followed by several rinses with distilled water and placed in Petri dishes containing wet blotting paper with progressively increasing concentrations of CdCl 2 (0–150 mg/l) and ZnSO 4 (0–3200 mg/l). The estimated dose (ED50) was then measured. The inoculated seeds were tested under the ED50 for zinc (800 mg/l) and cadmium (35 mg/l) concentrations. The Petri dishes were then placed in the dark for five days at 25 °C.
DNA extraction, library preparation, and genome sequencing DNA of Gram-negative bacteria was extracted using the MagCore Genomic DNA Bacterial kit (RBC Biosciences Corp., Taïwan). The quality and quantity of DNA was verified using the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay kit (Invitrogen) and NanoDrop 2000c UV–Vis Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The library was prepared using the DNA flex prep kit from Illumina according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, 200 ng of high-quality DNA was used for tagmentation. Then, dual indexation (i5-i7) was ligated to samples. The final library (4 nM) was quantified and denatured with NaOH, and sequenced on the Illumina Miseq instrument (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) using 2 × 250 paired-end reads).
Genome assembly, annotation, and phylogeny Sequencing quality control was performed for reads with an average size of 250 bp using FastQC (version 0.11.8) and poor-quality reads were trimmed using the Trimmomatic tool [ 20 ]. De Novo assembly was carried out using the Spades-3.13.1 tool [ 21 ]. The genome was annotated using the NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline (PGAP). ContEst16S (Contamination Estimator by 16S) was used to assess for contamination and retrieve the 16S rDNA fragment from the draft genome [ 22 ]. The dDDH was calculated using the Genome-to-Genome Distance Calculator (GGDC) version 2.0 and pairwise comparisons of the Pantoea sp. OB49 genome vs. type-strain genomes. The Whole Genome Shotgun project Pantoea eucrina strain OB49 has been deposited at DDBJ/ENA/GenBank under the accession JAFCXS000000000. The version described in this paper is version JAFCXS010000000. The BioProject accession number is PRJNA690006.
Whole-genome average nucleotide identity analysis The Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) matrix was calculated with the standalone OrthoANIu tool using a modified algorithm by Yoon et al., [ 23 ] to measure the overall genome relatedness between OB49 and the other Pantoea genomes. An ANI value of 95% was set as the cut-off for species demarcation.
Pan-genome construction The Pantoea genomes assigned as representative genomes retrieved from NCBI were re-annotated to obtain the gff3 files format on the Galaxy server using Prokka v.1.13.3 [ 24 ]. The analysis was carried out using the Panaroo tool [ 25 ]. The dated phylogeny tree of the gene core alignment was created with IQ-TREE [ 26 ], and a post-processing analysis was carried out using the Panstripe tool in which the gene presence-absence matrix and a dated phylogeny tree were used [ 27 ]. As calculated in Panaroo, the Pantoea pan-genome was divided into the following categories: core (gene families present in 99–100% of the genomes); soft-core (gene families present in 95–99% of the genomes); shell (gene families present in 15–95% of the genomes); cloud genes. The genomes used in the analysis were presented in supplementary (Table S2)
Orthologous gene clusters with OrthoVenn2 The OrthoVenn2 web server [ 17 ] was used to compare genomes and identify orthologous gene clusters (COGs) based on coding sequences (CDSs). The orthologous clusters were identified using the default parameters, with a 1 e-5 e-value cut-off for all protein similarity comparisons and a 1.5 inflation value for the generation of orthologous clusters. CGview server [ 28 ] was used for genome visualization and comparison. PATRIC server (3.9.6) was used for genome annotation analysis [ 29 ].
Mobile genetic elements analysis The MobileElementFinder tool [ 30 ] was used to detect mobile genetic elements (MGEs). MultiGeneBLAST [ 18 ] was used to blast unmapped sequences against Genbank Database, The database was built by downloading over 50 Gigabytes of data, including 688 gbbct files (Genbank bacterial division) (gbbct1 to gbbct99) of complete bacterial sequences/loci from the Genbank Bacterial Division (December 2021). (NCBI). The specified region of the contig S12 containing the arsenic and mercury operons was used as the query sequence against the constructed database for homologous cluster sequence similarity at the level of the entire gene cluster with a 30% sequence identify cut-off and 250 blastp hits mapped per query sequence using the MultiGeneBLAST program. The detection of transposons was carried out using the Tncomp_finder tool and the TnCentral database [ 31 ]. The ICEberg 2.0 tool was used to search for Integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs) [ 32 ].
Statistical analysis The results were statistically processed using the R software (R.4.0). ANOVA one-way test was used and when significant effects are detected, the groups were compared using a Post-hoc Tukey's HSD test using the agricolae r package. The level of significance used for all statistical tests is 5% ( p < 0.05). The toxicity test (dose-response curve) was performed by the DRC package [ 33 ]; the graphs were created with ggplot2 on RStudio.
Results Heavy metal tolerance and minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) Pantoea eucrina OB49 exhibits high tolerance to heavy metals, with resistance to arsenic in solid medium reaching 6000 mg/l. For copper, zinc, and chromium, the tolerance level was up to 400 mg/l, and 25 mg/l for cadmium. However, in liquid media, ( Fig. 1 ) The ANOVA test combined with Tukey's HSD test revealed no significant effect of zinc and copper on the growth of OB49 up to 3200 mg/l and 800 mg/l, respectively. In contrast, the effect of chromium was significant up to 400 mg/l, while the effect of cadmium was observed up to 80 mg/l. The growth of Ob49 under arsenic stress is significantly affected by 1000 mg/l. However, the increase in arsenic concentrations moderately inhibited the growth of bacteria in a liquid medium up to 8000 mg/l. (Table S3).
Heavy metal's effective dose curves The dose-response curves were created using the DRC package of the effective dose with four parameters (Slope, Lower Limit, Upper Limit, and ED50) of cadmium ( Fig. 2 , a), zinc ( Fig. 2 , b), copper ( Fig. 2 , c), chromium ( Fig. 2 , d), and arsenic ( Fig. 2 , e) on the growth of OB49 showed that heavy metal toxicity has a variable effect. The logarithm of the heavy metal dose is plotted on the X-axis and the response (optical density) is plotted on the Y-axis. These results showed that OB49 was more sensitive to cadmium than other heavy metals. The concentration of CdCl2 that inhibits the growth of 50% of bacterial cells (ED50) is 72.65 mg/l and ED95 is 149.23 mg/l. The ED50 for zinc, copper, chromium, and arsenic, on the other hand, are 3293 mg/l, 1618 mg/l, 1118 mg/l, and 12.959 g/l, respectively. Furthermore, zinc, chromium, and arsenic have a linear response in which the optical density decreases with increasing heavy metal concentrations. However, the effect of Cd and Cu plots a sigmoidal curve when ED50 is defined as the inflection point of the curve. The lower and upper parameters are shown in (Table S4).
Seedlings under heavy metal stress In the presence of cadmium and zinc, the growth-promoting potential of strain OB49 was also confirmed in vivo by measuring the shoot and root length of wheat seedlings in the dark for 5 days and in the light for up to 15 days. The wheat shoot length of inoculated seeds was increased by 15.64%, 15.79%, and 4.18% under cadmium, zinc, and control conditions, respectively. ( Fig. 3 a ). In contrast, there was a lack of a significant effect of OB49 on root length in all treatments ( Fig. 3 b). This result might be related to the quantity of auxin produced by OB49 in the presence of these heavy metals ( Table 1 ).
Genome features and phylogeny The Pantoea eucrina OB49 genome was assembled and found to be 4,039,986 bp in length, distributed over 51 scaffolds, with an N50 of 244,935 bp. The NCBI Prokaryotic genome annotation pipeline (PGAP) feature annotation produced a total of 3854 genes, with 3757 CDSs, 3701 coding genes, and 97 RNA genes including 12 ribosomal RNAs distributed as five 5S, four 16S, and three 23S. (Table S5) (Fig. S1, S2) [ 76 ].
The 16S-based phylogenetic tree shows that the OB49 isolate belongs to Pantoea eucrina . Using the RAxML program, the Codon Tree approach selects single-copy PATRIC Cross-genus families (PGfams) and analyzes aligned proteins and DNA encoding single-copy genes. The codon tree showed that the OB49 isolate belongs to the species Pantoea eucrina ( Fig. 4 ). These results are confirmed by the OrthoANI matrix of the 11 most related species of the genus Pantoea that were selected using the dDDH method and showed that Pantoea eucrina XL123 is the most related species to OB49 with an OrthoANI value of 99.83%.
Genomes comparison using the CGview server The genomes used for the comparative analysis were retrieved from The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) based on their relatedness to P. eucrina and their PGP potential. The comparison was done using Circular genome visualization (CGview server) [ 34 ]. The genomes from the outside to the inside are Pantoea eucrina strain OB49 (JAFCXS010000000), P. eucrina strain xl123 (CP083448), P. eucrina strain LMG 5346 (NZ_MIPP01000000), P. vagans strain Pa (NZ_MUJJ01000000), Pantoea sp. Strain 3.5.1 (NZ_JMRT02000000), P. eucrina strain Russ (NZ_MAYN01000000), P. ananatis strainYJ76 (NZ_CP022427), P. ananatis strain NN08200 (CP035034), P. agglomerans strain P5 (NZ_NGNU02000000), P. agglomerans strain 190 (JNGC00000000), and P. agglomerans strain 3 (NZ_LVHW00000000). ( Fig. 5 ).
Comparison of OB49 genome features with other Pantoea species using the CGview tool revealed the existence of unaligned regions distributed across the genome; these regions are mainly distributed on contigs JAFCXS010000010.1 (S10), JAFCXS010000012.1 (S12), JAFCXS010000015.1 (S15) and JAFCXS010000024.1 (S24).
Pan-genome analysis A pan-genome study was undertaken to further explore the chosen Pantoea genomes (Table S2). The Pantoea pan-genome has 27,767 gene orthologs, of which 542 are shared by the core and soft-core genomes, while 4336 and 22,889 clusters constitute the shell and cloud genomes. The analysis of the strains of Pantoea eucrina showed that it had 4165 genes, 3035 of which were core genes and 1130 were shell genes. The pan-genome results were analyzed using the Panstripe pipeline, which uses parameters for measuring the number of gene exchange events and the association between the gene gain and loss and the branch lengths in the phylogeny ( Tables 2 and 3 ).
The primary parameters are the "core term," which shows whether branch lengths in the phylogeny are associated to gene gain and loss, and the "tip term," which indicates whether the rate of gene exchange at the tips of the phylogeny differs from that of the internal branches. Applying these parameters to the pan-genome for both the Pantoea group and the P. eucrina subgroup revealed a significant association between the core genome branch length and the number of gene exchange events ( Pantoea core; p = 2.20e-09; P. eucrina core; p = 0.000883). The different rate of gene exchange at the tips of the phylogeny compared with the internal branches was significant as well ( Pantoea tip; p = 1.8e-04; P. eucrina tip; p = 0.000289). According to the significant association between the core genome and branch length, the Pantoea pan-genome is open ( Fig. 6 ).
COG comparison of Pantoea eucrina OB49 to other Pantoea species The comparison of orthologous cluster groups on Orthovenn2 reveals that Pantoea PGPB species form 5361 clusters, 2737 orthologous clusters (at least two species), and 2624 single-copy gene clusters. Whereas Pantoea eucrina OB49 has the fewest proteins (3666) and clusters (3320) compared to all species, it has the second-highest number of singletons (374), trailing Pantoea vagans 3.5.1, which has 473 singletons ( Table 4 ).
There are 2699 clusters shared by all species. P. eucrina OB49, on the other hand, has 122 distinct clusters, each of which contains 132 proteins. According to the GO enrichment annotation, biological process, and metabolic process are present in 14% of the cases, followed by the cellular metabolic process at 13%, nitrogen compound metabolic process, and cellular process at 9%, and macromolecule metabolic process, heterocycle metabolic process, cellular aromatic compound metabolic process, primary metabolic process, and nucleobase-containing compound metabolic process at 8% or less.
The impact of the lateral gene transfer shaping Pantoea eucrina OB49 We performed an extensive analysis of mobile genetic elements (MGEs) in the Pantoea eucrina OB49 genome using the MobileElementFinder tool, Multigeneblast, the Tncomp_finder tool, and the TnCentral database. We found that OB49 carries a plethora of transposons and insertion sequences, and a putative Integrative and conjugative element (ICE); these MGEs harbour genes that encode tolerance to antibiotics and heavy metals, including the broad-spectrum beta-lactamase class A TEM-1 (bla TEM-1B ), arsenic, mercury, tellurium, fluoride, silver, and copper, as shown in Table S6.
Discussion The genus Pantoea has commonly recognized as a plant growth-promoting bacterium (PGPB) and has industrial features including bioremediation and the degradation of herbicides and other toxic compounds [ 35 ]. The well-known Pantoea PGPB species are P. agglomerans, P. ananatis, and P. vagans . although P. ananatis was reported as a phytopathogen that infects agronomic crops such as maize, rice, and onion [ 36 , 37 ]. In contrast, some other studies have demonstrated its biocontrol ability [ 38 ]. The most important PGPB trait among Pantoea species is its ability to solubilize phosphorus by converting insoluble forms of phosphorus (P) to accessible forms [ 39–41 ] in solid or liquid media, highlighting the importance of this attribute in plant growth.
In this study, we investigated for the first time Pantoea eucrina species as a plant-growth-promoting and heavy metal tolerant bacterium. This species displays the following properties; colonies are round, convex, and smooth with entire margins; Indole is not produced; Phenylalanine deaminase reaction is weakly positive as described by Brady et al., [ 42 ]. OB49 strain was isolated from the rhizosphere of wheat ( Triticum durum ) grown on a site contaminated with heavy metals and irrigated with industrial and municipal wastewater in Setif, Algeria (Table S1), where heavy metal concentrations were considered not safe for plant growth [ 43 ]. In vitro OB49 exhibited the ability to grow under abiotic stress, such as heavy metals, salt, and drought. This strain was identified as Pantoea eucrina OB49 using 16S RNA and average nucleotide identity (ANI method) and by the genome to genome hybridization (dDDH), OB49 is a gram-negative, rod-shaped bacteria and has paprika color and belongs to the Enterobacteria group.
The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) study of heavy metals showed a high tolerance of OB49 to heavy metals. Y. Feng Zhang et al., [ 44 ] [ 45 ] reported an endophytic bacterium P. agglomerans JP3–3 isolated from Cu-tolerant plants grown on Cu mine wasteland in China which could grow under 2.2 mM (450 mg/l) of CdSO 4 and 1.6 mM (255 mg/l) of CuSO 4 that would be used in phytoremediation applications. Furthermore, Wang et al., [ 46 ] described Pantoea sp. IMH that exhibited high tolerance to As(V) 20 mM, which harboured two ars systems - ars1 ( arsR1B1C1H1 ) and ars2 ( arsR2B2C2H2 ) - with low sequence homology and two arsC -like genes. These results suggest that OB49 is considered a highly tolerant bacterium to heavy metals. On the other hand, the toxicity test using the dose-response curve in a liquid medium showed that the (estimated dose) ED50 of heavy metals showed this order of toxicity CdCl2 > K2Cr2O7 > CuCl2 > ZnSO4 > Na2HAsO4.
To provide information on the genetic elements and determinants associated with heavy metal resistance, the entire genome of strain OB49 was sequenced and annotated. In this regard, we found that strain OB49 could use multiple mechanisms to cope with heavy metal stress, including proteins of the transport system, namely, the multidrug efflux system MdtABC-TolC, inner-membrane proton/drug antiporter MdtB (RND type) (TC 2.A.6.2.12), and Copper/silver efflux RND transporter, transmembrane protein CusA (TC 2.A.6.1.3) (Table S7). These proteins are involved in resistance to drugs and different heavy metals such as copper, arsenic, cadmium, lead, mercuric, and zinc. According to Su et al., [ 47 ] Gram-negative bacteria use tripartite efflux complexes of the resistance-nodulation-cell division (RND) family to expel a variety of harmful substances from the cell, copper ions (Cu + ) and Ag + were removed from the cytoplasm and periplasm of the cell by the Cus efflux system. Whereas, drug resistance depends on the simultaneous presence of all three proteins (MdtA/MdtB/MdtC) that also contribute to copper and zinc resistance [ 48 , 49 ]. In accordance with the present results, previous studies have demonstrated that Pantoea agglomerans C1 tolerates up to 100 mM As(V) equivalent to 7400 mg/l, whose mechanism was confirmed through genome analysis by the existence of the Arsenite/antimonite: H+ antiporter ArsB (TC 3.A.4.1.1) [ 50 ]. Moreover, the ATP-binding protein ZnuC (TC 3.A.1.15.5), a component of the ZnuABC transporter, was increased only in planktonic cultures of Halobacterium salinarum exposed to Ni 2+ , these findings may suggest its contribution to heavy metal resistance [ 51 ].
In addition to the transport system, OB49 also has an enzymatic process to deal with other heavy metals such as lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), zinc (Zn), and mercury (Hg). The copper transport ATPase; copper translocation P-type ATPase (TC 3.A.3.5.4) are also involved in heavy metal resistance [ 52 ]. The P-type Cu 2+ transporter (EC 7.2.2.9) undergoes covalent phosphorylation during the transport cycle. The enzyme of the thermophilic archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus is involved in the extrusion of copper from the cell [ 53 ].
OB49 produces secondary metabolites such as siderophores of type hydroxamate ( fhuE, fhuB, fhuD, fhuC, and fhuA ), which can chelate iron to make it accessible to the roots of the plant and contribute to heavy metal stress elevation [ 54 ]. Dimkpa [ 55 ] reported that Streptomyces acidiscabies E13 promoted cowpea growth under nickel contamination by binding iron and nickel.
The Pantoea genome comparative analysis with Orthovenn2 and CGview server indicated that OB49 has partial phage sequences spread on the contigs JAFCXS010000010 and JAFCXS010000015, However, JAFCXS010000015 contig was identified as phage region using PHASTER (PHAge Search Tool Enhanced Release) [ 56 ].
Orthovenn2 results showed that P. agglomerans P5 shared the highest number of clusters with P. eucrina OB49. These clusters included genes involved in the resistance to heavy metals, xenobiotic degradation, phosphate regulation (Phosphate regulon transcriptional regulatory protein PhoB), and resistance to abiotic stress. The majority of them are plasmid-encoded proteins; these are Copper resistance proteins CpoA, CpoD, CpoB, CpoC, and tellurium resistance proteins TerA, TerW, TerC, TerB, TerD, TerZ, and TerE. Some of these clusters are chromosomes located as a cellular hyperosmotic response (GO:0071474) and Cysteine protease StiP that may play a role in regulating cell morphology in response to stressful conditions which likely cause oxidative damage. Reichert et al., [ 57 ] have suggested that this protease is required for normal cell morphology and resistance to tellurite.
The comparison of clusters reveals that Pantoea eucrina OB49 has proteins involved in resistance to various abiotic stresses such as salinity (Glycine betaine transporter), osmotic stress protection (Probable metabolite transport protein CsbC ), silver resistance (Probable transcriptional regulatory protein SilR ), cadmium resistance (Probable cadmium-transporting ATPase), and phosphate metabolism (Alkaline phosphatase phoA ). As well as proteins involved in UV protection and mutation (MucA, MucB).
Bacteriophage proteins P1 and P2 are also present in the genome, these phage proteins are involved in encapsidation such as (Probable terminase, large subunit pacB), which prevents host degradation of viral DNA. The antiviral restriction defence systems EcoB and EcoK (Defence against restriction protein A and B) which is involved in recombination enhancement of the IS1 element (Recombination enhancement function protein, Recombinase cre), an Endolysin K with transglycosylase activity that degrades host peptidoglycans leading to programmed lysis of the host cell releasing mature virus particles. Proteins involved in recombination, insertion of transposable elements, and plasmid stabilisation have also been identified. These proteins include the isoIS1d insertion element protein InsA, the tyrosine recombinase XerD, the type 2 restriction enzyme EcoRII, the InsF transposase for the IS3A insertion sequence, the Tn2501 transposon resolvase tnpR, the recombination-associated protein RdgC, the transposon transposase Tn1721, the putative transposase y4zB, the resolvase, and the regulatory protein rop.
As mentioned in the results section, the mobile genetic elements MGEs harboured genes that confer resistance to antibiotics and heavy metals were detected. Knowing that OB49 was isolated from contaminated soil irrigated with mixed effluent and that the MGEs are frequently carriers of hydrocarbon degradation genes and heavy metals tolerance, their dissemination has been proposed as a key component in rapid adaptation to pollution [ 58 ]. Based on how open or closed the pan-genome is and how big it is, we can guess about an organism's lifestyle and its opportunity to carry in new DNA and gain new functions. Most of the time, organisms that live in a community where horizontal gene transfer is common to have a pan-genome that is large and open [ 59 ]. De Maayer et al. [ 60 ] found that the genome of P. ananatis is open. Furthermore, Tonkin Hill et al. [ 25 , 27 ] guess that when deciding whether a genome is open or closed, gene gain and loss patterns are looked at for a signal of time. After fitting a panstripe model, the coefficient and p -value of the "core" term can be used to figure out how important the temporal signal is. Based on this finding, we suggest that Pantoea has an open genome, and we suggest that OB49 acquired heavy metal resistance genes for adaptation following this prolonged exposure to polluted wastewater. This view is supported by Altimira et al., [ 61 ] who suggested that bacterial communities of agricultural soils from central Chile subjected to long-term Cu pollution have been adapted by acquiring Cu genetic determinants like the copA gene in plasmids of four Cu-resistant strains.
Using the MobileElementFinder tool [ 33 ] and TnCentral database, results showed that the S12 contig has four distinct MGEs identified as follows; the unit-transposon Tn2, located at position (32,966-37,915) and a length of 4950 bp in the reverse strand. This transposon had two inverted repeats of 38 bp length and includes an antibiotic resistance gene, the broad spectrum beta-lactamase class A TEM-1 (bla TEM-1B ) which encodes phenotypic resistance to amoxicillin, ampicillin, ticarcillin, piperacillin and cephalothin, the Tn3 transposase encoded by the tnpA gene, and the Tn3 resolvase encoded by the tnpR gene.
The second was the composite transposon TnAs1.1 (Accession number; TnAs1.1-CP022426). It is located at position 66,094–69,223 in the forward strand. The third MGE corresponds to an insertion sequence (ISApu1-CR376602) which was found nested within the TnAs1.1. It belongs to the IS4 family and the ISH8 group and is located at 67840–69223 in the forward strand with a length of 1384 bp. This IS was identified in Aeromonas salmonicida sub sp. pectinolytica 34mel. The fourth MGE is the IS5075 insertion sequence which belongs to the IS110 family and the IS1111 group and was located at position 89,799–91,125 on the S12 contig ( Fig. 7 ).
Multigeneblast results showed that OB49 carries two virtually identical arsRBCH operons encoding resistance to inorganic arsenic species, one of which is located on the S10 contig and the second on the S12 contig. The blasting results showed a perfect similarity (100%) of the region located at (57935–72,310) on the S12 contig to Enterobacter hormaechei strain EB_P9_L5_03.19 plasmid pIMPIncH12_331kb. This fragment mainly hosts the merRTPCADE operon, a recombinase family protein, a Tn3-like element, a TnAs1 family transposase, an IS4-like element, an ISApu2 family transposase a hypothetical protein, a zinc-binding protein of the alcohol dehydrogenase family, a heme-binding protein, a DUF1330 domain-containing protein, a TlpA family protein, and disulfide reductase. In contrast, the arsRBCH operon blast showed no perfect hits with the arsenic clusters in the Multigeneblast database. However, the best hits results were detected for the chromosome of Enterobacter hormaechei subsp. xiangfangensis strain 34,978 and the plasmid pJNQH579–2 of Klebsiella variicola strain. The blast results for the best hits are presented in (Table S8).
Using the ICEberg tools, for the detection of Integrative and conjugative elements, a Putative ICE without identified direct repeats (DR) was detected on the contig S12 ( Fig. 7 a, Fig. S3), this ICE is located at 1284.0.43,590 (nt), with 42,307 bp length without an origin site of DNA transfer ( OriT ) or insertion site because of the lack of a tRNA. This ICE is specifically characterized by the presence of a Type IV secretion system (T4SS), a relaxase, and tyrosine recombinase/integrase xerC. The Tn3 family transposase that harbours the TEM-1 (bla TEM-1B ) resistance gene is included in this ICE. This putative ICE has a similar structure to Tn916, which contains, in addition to the conjugation genes, the antibiotic resistance gene and the tyrosine recombinase without a specific attachment site ( att B) [ 62 , 63 ]. The lack of transfer origin ( ori T) and the specific attachment sites in this putative ICE might be due to the incomplete genome assembly ( Fig. 7 a).
According to the mechanism described by Johnson & Grossman [ 64 ], another mobile element can insert into an ICE. However, elements can transpose from another chromosomal location or extrachromosomal elements and can recombine into an ICE by site-specific or homologous recombination. These elements then become part of the ICE and are transferred with the ICE in cis during conjugation.
In our case, we suggest that the mobile elements that harbour arsenic operon, and fluoride resistance genes, together with the composite transposon that harbours mer operon and the insertion sequence ISaPu1 and ISapu2 is a putative ICE, which was inserted into the original ICE ( Fig. 7 c). This mobile element carried genes that facilitate insertion and conjugation, such as Single-stranded DNA-binding protein (JJB79_15185), Resolvase/integrase (JJB79_15120), Serine recombinase, PinQ/PinR-type (JJB79_15145), and the type II toxin-antitoxin system YafQ family toxin (JJB79_15080).
ICEs can be integrated into and excised from the chromosome using tyrosine/serine recombinases or DDE transposases. ICEs can be excised and transferred to other cells either randomly or under specific conditions; a single DNA strand is transferred to the new host, where a DNA polymerase regenerates the double-stranded element [ 65 ]. Toxin-antitoxin and restriction-modification systems, encoded inside ICEs, can cause post-segregational death of daughter cells that have lost the corresponding system, therefore obviating potential rivals and improving ICE maintenance [ 66 ]. The comparison of this ICE against the ICEberg database revealed no similarity with ICEs in the database (Fig. S3), which suggest that S12 is a different putative integrative and conjugative element.
The co-existence of two copies of the ars operon, which has been observed when the same genetic arrangement appears twice in the same chromosome, is detected in some situations, as was reported in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 [ 67 ] and subsequently detected in a highly arsenic-tolerant bacterium Pantoea sp. IMH [ 46 ]. Therefore, given the high tolerance of OB49 to heavy metals particularly arsenic, the comparative analysis led us to investigate the likely cause of this tolerance. In P. eucrina OB49, the ars1RBCH operon was detected in the S12 contig and was found associated with the merRTPCADE operon in a Tn3-like transposon that seems hypothetically described for the first time, the ars2RBCH operon that is located on the S10 contig is commonly found in chromosomes or plasmids of Pantoea and Enterobacteria species.
The two ars operons are identical in terms of genetic arrangement and consist of a self-repressive transcriptional regulator ( arsR ), a membrane transporter that extrudes As +3 from the cell ( arsB ), an arsenate reductase ( arsC ) for the conversion of As +4 to As +3, and an arsH gene of unknown function but also important for arsenic resistance. Interestingly, the pairwise alignment showed differences between these two operons, where genetic variations were found. This allows us to suggest that these two operons might function in different ways. Another point that needs to be emphasized is that ars1RBCH of (S12) had no perfective similarity to any sequence in the entire database. On the other hand, the existence of the complete merRTPCADE operon in association with the ars operon suggests that OB49 acquired these MGEs from different bacteria to cope with mercury and arsenic stress.
According to Páez-Espino et al., [ 67 ], the contribution of the two ars operons to the arsenic resistance phenotype of KT2440 was not additive, as either cluster was sufficient to confer a high level of resistance to the metalloid on the cells. Similarly, the influence of temperature seems to be the fundamental element that favors the coexistence of the two identical operons. Wang et al., [ 46 ] reported that pH variations do not influence the expression of arsC1 or arsC2 , whereas temperature influences the expression of ars1 which turns out to be the predominant contributor. In agreement with the explanation of Páez-Espino and Wang and by observing the climate of the Setif region, where the temperature shows a great divergence between summer and winter, we could suggest that temperature has influenced this adaptability of OB49 to such conditions.
Six structural genes denoted merTPCADE are found in Pantoea eucrina OB49's mer operon. Even though the Tn21 mer operon consists of only five structural genes ( merTPCAD ), from which MerR is divergently transcribed, MerTPCAD participates in mercury detoxification via a process that, contrary to popular belief, includes mercury import into the cell. MerP binds mercury in the periplasm and transports it to MerT (a membrane-bound transporter), which then transports Hg 2+ to MerA . MerA converts Hg 2+ to the more volatile Hg 0 , which may then diffuse through the cell membrane and into the environment [ 68 ]. Helman et al., [ 68 ] reported that merD serves as a co-regulator of this system and in essence resets the response by allowing MerR without Hg 2+ bound to be made, thereby repressing transcription again. Sone et al., [ 69 ] suggested that among the four transporters studied, MerC showed more potential to transport Hg(II) across bacterial membranes than MerE , MerF, and MerT . In the same context, Ohshiro et al., [ 70 ] suggested that MerC , MerE , MerF, and MerT are broad-spectrum heavy metal transporters that mediate both mercury and cadmium transport into cells and that MerP accelerates the cadmium transport ability of MerC , MerE , MerF, and MerT .
The region carrying both the ars1RBCH operon and the merRTPCADE operon in OB49 was compared to the Genbank database. The results showed the presence of transport proteins that extrude small molecules and ions from the cell via the inner membrane, such as the fluoride efflux transporter CrcB which participates in the fluoride resistance as described in the E. cloacae FRM [ 71 ]. This protein is encoded by an operon of six genes working together, including the universal stress proteins. This region includes also the Na+/H+ antiporter NhaA, the inorganic anion transporter of the SulP family, and the major facilitator superfamily transporter (MFS), which contribute to mitigating osmotic stress [ 72–74 ]. These genes have been found associated with the ars1RBCH operons in a significant number of species with more or less different genetic arrangements from one species to another. This may suggest their contribution to arsenic resistance since this arrangement could affect the expression of the ars operon under different conditions.
Conclusion This work provides insight into the heavy metal tolerance and PGP properties of Pantoea eucrina OB49 through in-vitro and in - silico analyses. We showed that OB49 is able to survive under high concentrations of heavy metals; this strain has PGP characteristics that allow it to enhance plant development in contaminated sites. Pan-genomic and comparative analysis revealed that the pan-genome of P. eucrina OB49 is open, which may allow it to acquire MGEs that harbour heavy metal resistance genes through horizontal gene transfer. Our results suggest the identification of an integrative and conjugative element (ICE) and transposons that carried genes for antibiotic resistance and mercury tolerance. Based on the present results, P. eucrina strain OB49 may be involved in an ecological alternative for heavy metal remediation and growth promotion of wheat grown in metal-polluted soils.