https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jgar.2024.02.009
Title: Genomic insights into an extensively drug-resistant and hypervirulent Burkholderia dolosa N149 isolate of a novel sequence type (ST2237) from a Vietnamese patient hospitalised for stroke
Abstract: Objectives Burkholderia dolosa is a clinically important opportunistic pathogen in inpatients. Here we characterised an extensively drug-resistant and hypervirulent
B. dolosa isolate from a patient hospitalised for stroke. Methods Resistance to 41 antibiotics was tested with the agar disc diffusion, minimum inhibitory concentration, or broth microdilution method. The complete genome was assembled using short-reads and long-reads and the hybrid de novo assembly method. Allelic profiles obtained by multilocus sequence typing were analysed using the PubMLST database. Antibiotic-resistance and virulence genes were predicted in silico using public databases and the ‘baargin’ workflow.
B. dolosa N149 phylogenetic relationships with all available B. dolosa strains and Burkholderia cepacia
complex strains were analysed using the pangenome obtained with Roary. Results B. dolosa N149 displayed extensive resistance to 31 antibiotics and intermediate resistance to 4 antibiotics. The complete genome included three circular chromosomes (6 338 630 bp in total) and one plasmid (167 591 bp). Genotypic analysis revealed various gene clusters (acr, amr, amp, emr, ade, bla and tet) associated with resistance to 35 antibiotic classes. The major intrinsic resistance mechanisms were multidrug efflux pump alterations, inactivation and reduced permeability of targeted antibiotics. Moreover, 91 virulence genes (encoding proteins involved in adherence, formation of capsule, biofilm and colony, motility, phagocytosis inhibition, secretion systems, protease secretion, transmission and quorum sensing) were identified.
B. dolosa N149 was assigned to a novel sequence type (ST2237) and formed a mono-phylogenetic clade separated from other
B. dolosa strains. Conclusions This study provided insights into the antimicrobial resistance and virulence mechanisms of
B. dolosa . Introduction Burkholderia dolosa belongs to the Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) of opportunistic bacteria, and is an important nosocomial pathogen [1 , 2] . The emergence of multi-resistant B. dolosa strains , particularly to the latest generation of antibiotics, is a serious public health problem. This pathogen displays intrinsic resistance to various antibiotics, thus limiting the treatment options and increasing the mortality rate [3] . The genetic determinants associated with antibiotic resistance in B. dolosa have not been extensively investigated. Here, we explored the genomic features of an extensively drug-resistant and hypervirulent B. dolosa strain, named N149.
Materials and methods The B. dolosa strain N149 was isolated from a bronchial fluid sample of a 80-year-old Vietnamese woman hospitalised for stroke at 108 Military Central Hospital, Hanoi, in 2021. The isolate was identified as B. dolosa using the VITEK-MS system (BioMérieux, USA) and confirmed by 16S rRNA sequencing. Antibiotic susceptibility testing (AST) was carried out for 44 antibiotics belonging to 21 antimicrobial classes using the disc diffusion test, the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) determined with the VITEK-2 Compact system, or the broth microdilution method. The AST results were interpreted following the 2020 Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines.
B. dolosa N149 genomic DNA was extracted using the DNeasy PowerLyzer Microbial Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer's instructions. Short-read whole-genome DNA sequencing was performed at Beijing Genomics Institute (Shenzen, China) on a BGI-SEQ500 platform using a 2 × 150 paired-end protocol. Long-read sequencing was performed using the Rapid Barcoding Kit (SQK-RBK004) on a R9.4.1 flow cell (FLO-MIN106D) and the MinION M1kB device (Oxford, United Kingdom) at University of Science and Technology of Hanoi (USTH), Vietnam. Hybrid de novo genome assembly, combining short and long reads, was done with Unicycler v0.4.9, and the completeness was checked with BUSCO v5.2.2.
The genome sequence was annotated using Bakta v1.6.0, and then genotyping was performed according to the multilocus sequence typing (MLST) scheme developed by Institute Pasteur, France. Novel allele profiles were deposited in the PubMLST database. Putative antibiotic resistance genes were predicted in silico using a combination of tools, including ResFinder v4.2.3, AMRfinderPlus v3.11.14, Resistance Gene Identifier (RGI) RGI v6.0.2 in the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD) v3.2.7. Virulence factors were predicted using VFanalyzer and the VFDB database ( http://www.mgc.ac.cn/cgi-bin/VFs/v5/main.cgi ). CRISPR-Cas sequences, mobile genetic elements, and prophages were identified with CRISPRCasFinder, MobileElementFinder, and PHASTER, respectively. Genomic islands (GIs) were predicted using IslandPick, IslandPath-DIMOB and SIGI-HMM. The core genome-based phylogenetic relationships between B. dolosa N149 and the five available B. dolosa and 37 representative Bcc strains ( n = 20 Burkholderia cepacia, n = 2 Burkholderia stabilis, n = 5 Burkholderia vietnamiensis, n = 10 Burkholderia cenocepacia) were studied with Roary v3.11.2. The complete circular chromosome maps and phylogeny were visualised with Proksee.
Results and discussion B. dolosa N149 was extensively resistant to 30 drugs belonging to 19 different antibiotic groups, and displayed intermediate resistance to aztreonam, ofloxacin, temocillin and tetracycline. This huge range of antibiotic resistances demonstrates the multi-drug resistant phenotype and challenges the treatment of B. dolosa infections. Nonetheless, some second/third generation drugs belonging to groups of aminoglycoside, beta-lactam, cephalosporin, monobactam, particularly fluoroquinolone and tetracycline are still effective against B. dolosa infection ( Table 1 ).
B. dolosa N149 complete genome included three circular chromosomes of 3 298 494 bp (chromosome 1), 2 211 974 bp (chromosome 2), and 828 162 bp (chromosome 3), with a GC content from 67.0 to 67.4%, and one plasmid of 167 591 bp with a GC content of 62.2% ( Fig. 1 A). The genome harboured 5536 known protein-encoding genes, 18 rRNAs, 83 tRNAs and 12 GIs. Mobile genetic elements were found in the GIs, including the prophage integrase int A, transposases of the IS3 and IS21 families, and the tyrosine recombinase XerC, which can facilitate the acquisition and transfer of antibiotic-resistance and virulent determinants. Comparative sequence analysis revealed 96% of similarity between the plasmid of B. dolosa N149 and the plasmid of B. cenocepacia HI2424 (coverage of 57%) (GenBank accession number: CP000461.1), suggesting the potential transmission of plasmids among Bcc via horizontal gene transfers. Interestingly, the completely sequenced plasmid of B. dolosa was reported for the first time on NCBI.
B. dolosa N149 resistome comprised various antibiotic-resistance gene clusters ( acr, amr, emr, ade, bla and tet ) associated with resistance to 35 antibiotic classes, many of which are responsible for resistance to β-lactams, tetracyclines, macrolides, aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones ( Fig. 1 A). In concordance with the phenotypic-resistant data, the genotypic-resistant profile highlighted B. dolosa N149 multi-drug-resistance. The most common resistance mechanisms implicated alterations in genes encoding efflux pumps, including the resistance-nodulation-cell division, major facilitator superfamily, ATP-binding cassette, multidrug and toxic-compound extrusion, and small multidrug resistance families [4] . Other resistance mechanisms included antibiotic target alteration, antibiotic inactivation, and reduced permeability to antibiotics. These findings underline the important role of intrinsic antibiotic-resistance mechanisms in B. dolosa and in Bcc. Furthermore, Bcc species also readily acquire other antibiotic-resistance mechanisms under selective pressure during treatment course. Therefore, genomic surveillance plays a key role in the management and control system of emerging multidrug-resistant pathogens.
B. dolosa N149 carried 79 virulence genes associated with increased adherence to host cells ( boa A), colony formation, protease secretion and motility (type IV pili), phagocytosis inhibition by formation of capsular and other cell wall components (capsule I man C), lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis ( wbj D), and structural formation of flagella ( che, flg, flh, fli, mot and tsr families) ( Fig. 1 A). Genes encoding proteins related to the secretion systems type II, III, IV and VI, anaerobic respiration ( nar G), biofilm formation ( ade G), cell surface components ( sug C), efflux pumps ( acr B, far B), immune evasion ( gtr B), iron uptake ( pvd F) and the actin cross-linking toxin VgrG1 were also identified. The PmlI-PmlR quorum sensing system, which contributes to virulence and modulates the MprA protease production in Burkholderia pseudomallei [5] , was present also in B. dolosa N149 genome. The many virulent factors detected in its genome suggest that B. dolosa is highly transmissible compared with other Bcc species [6] .
Novel alleles in glt B (positions146 A-G and 316 C-T), gyr B (101 T-C and 230 T-C) and atp D (215 G-A) were detected in B. dolosa N149 genome resulting in a novel sequence type (ST2237) based on the Institute Pasteur MLST scheme. Accordingly, in the core genome-based phylogenetic tree, B. dolosa N149 was separated from the clade containing other B. dolosa strains ( Fig. 1 B). Furthermore, some Bcc strains were not clustered in the same species clade suggesting that their taxonomic name needs for revision. Presently, the taxonomic relationship of the Bcc species is still not well established [7] . This could be problematic for diagnosis and antimicrobial therapy, and therefore, the accurate classification of Bcc species is particular needed.
In summary, the many antimicrobial resistance and virulence genes found in B. dolosa N149 genome could favour its adaptation and survival in various ecological niches. These findings should guide the therapy management and the introduction of measure to control B. dolosa spreading.